Appendix 3: DivAirCity Data Framework Entity SpecificationsThe details of all entities (concepts) of the framework are detailed in the below table.  In the case of each entity, the data fields and types are identified.  This has been completed by using external references (standards) where needed. Table 3: List of entitiesEntity IDName of entityEntity grouping1PLANCo-creation governance2OBJECTIVECo-creation governance3TARGETCo-creation governance4SERVICECo-creation governance5PHASECo-creation governance6EVENTCo-creation governance7DECISIONCo-creation governance8COMMUNITYAgent9ORGANISATIONAgent10PERSONAgent11STATISTICSSocial metrics12PUBLIC_DATABASESocial metrics13SURVEYSocial metrics14COUNTRYGeospatial boundary15ADMIN_DIV_1Geospatial boundary16ADMIN_DIV_2Geospatial boundary17ADMIN_DIV_3Geospatial boundary18LOCATIONGeospatial boundary19BUILDINGCity object20NBS PROJECTCity object21STREET_FURNITURECity object22SENSORCity object23SENSOR MEASUREMENTEnvironmental metrics24RESOURCEEconomic Assets25METRICSocial/environmental/ economic metricsPLANTable 4. PLAN definition and attributes1PLANDefinitionA list of steps with times and RESOURCEs, used to achieve anOBJECTIVE.ExamplesA local air pollution plan, a national decarbonization action plan. Fields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of DataPLAN_IDPlan codeIntegerPlan NameName of planVarcharPlan typeType of planVarcharORGANISATION_IDOrganisation (e.g. local authority) published this plan IntegerScope of the planNational plan/regional plan/city plan/ neighbourhood planADMIN_DIV_ID The area that this plan is aboutIntegerFocus of the plan Sustainability/ transportation / regeneration.. VarcharTimescaleFrequency of plans IntegerStart DateThis plan starts from..DateEnd DateThis plan is valid until..Date StatusActive/achievedVarcharDocuments Related files attachedVarcharOBJECTIVE_IDObjective categorisation of this plan (list of sub-impact area)VarcharORGANISATION_IDOrganisations who participatedIntegerDivAirCity PlanYes/No BooleanTarget area (ha)Total target area of this plan FloatNBS_PROJECT_IDNBS projects that are implemented under this planVarcharExistence of citizen science elementYes/NoBooleanOutcomesDescription of the outcomes of this planVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesUsage Example or Sample DataAir pollution strategy – London –  timescale 10 yearsDiversity action plan – Paris – timescale 5 years Figure : PLAN entity relationshipsOBJECTIVETable 5. OBJECTIVE definition and attributes2OBJECTIVEDefinitionAn achievement desired by an AGENTExamplesCreate new jobs in the energy sectorFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataOBJECTIVE_IDID of the objectiveIntegerObjective nameName of objectiveVarcharTARGET_IDTARGET related to this OBJECTIVEIntegerPLAN_IDID of PLAN which has this OBJECTIVEIntegerSERVICE_IDID of SERVICE related to this OBJECTIVEIntegerDECISION_IDID of DECISION related to this OBJECTIVEIntegerSTAKEHOLDER_IDID of STAKEHOLDER related to this OBJECTIVEIntegerDescriptionDescription of this OBJECTIVEVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesWhere OBJECTIVEs are set for a COMMUNITY, the desire might be to change the well?being of the PERSONs or ORGANIZATIONs in it.Usage Example or Sample DataFigure . OBJECTIVE entity relationship diagramTARGETTable 6. TARGET definition and attributes3EVENTDefinitionWith a given OBJECTIVE there may be several different TARGETS that have different aims. It is a desired state which specifies the target time and area. ExamplesBoosting revenue of local businesses by 10%.Fields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataTARGET_IDID of targetIntegerDescriptionQualitative description of the target(s)VarcharTarget dateDeadline by when this target will be met. DateOBJECTIVE_IDID of related objectiveIntegerPLAN_IDID of plan linked to targetIntegerRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesA TARGET provides a value at a time in the future. TARGETs are linked to OBJECTIVEs, which are in turn linked to the AGENT that has set the TARGET.Usage Example or Sample DataFigure . TARGET entity relationship diagramSERVICETable 7. SERVICE definition and attributes4SERVICEDefinitionService which is provided by NBS project and participating organisation to achieve the OBJECTIVEExamplesAn energy supplyhealthcare serviceInternet serviceFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataSERVICE_IDID of the service being providedIntegerNBS_PROJECT_IDProvided by / used byIntegerOBJECTIVE_IDThis service is related to OBJECTIVEIntegerRESOURCE_IDResource used IntegerRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesA SERVICE is typically targeted at a COMMUNITY.A SERVICE can consume RESOURCEs and give benefitUsage Example or Sample DataFigure . SERVICE entity relationship diagramPHASETable 8. PHASE definition and attributes5PHASEDefinitionPHASE is a set of EVENTs within a PLAN according to the stage of PLANExamplese.g. Understanding & establishing co-creationFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataPHADE_IDID of phaseIntegerPhase nameName of phaseVarcharDescriptionDescription of phaseVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesThis entity is devised to monitor the participatory decision-making processes.  Not only the involvement itself but also the stage in which citizens participate (e.g. early stage to make decisions together, or in the later stage to consult the decision made by other stakeholders) can significantly affect the quality of co-creation.Usage Example or Sample DataFigure . PHASE entity relationship diagramEVENTTable 9. EVENT definition and attributes6TARGETDefinitionAn occurrence that has happenedExamplesMeetingWorkshopLocal educational event Fields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataEvent_IDID of eventType of EventsCategory of event Education activities / consultation / workshopADMIN_DIV_3_IDScale linked with eventIntegerPLAN_IDID of the plan linked to eventIntegerDate of eventDate or dates of eventDatePHASE_IDID of associated cocreation phaseIntegerEvent locationLocation of eventCoordinates or GIS shapefileRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesAn EVENT might occur over a short period of time or a long period of time.Usage Example or Sample DataFigure . EVENT entity relationship diagramDECISIONTable 10. DECISION definition and attributes7DECISIONDefinitionA conclusion reached after considerationExamplesDecision to agree a plan Deciding the location of NBS projectFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataDECISION_IDDecision codeIntegerPLAN_IDRelated plansIntegerPERSONS_IDPerson who participatesIntegerORGANISATION_IDOrganisation that participatesIntegerEVENT_IDThe meeting that the decision made atIntegerDescriptionText about the context of decisionVarcharDocuments (files attached)Documents about the decisionFile/ linkRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesA DECISION is the outcome of an EVENT, and not the EVENTitself. A DECISION is taken by an ORGANISATION.Figure . DECISION entity relationshipsCOMMUNITYTable 11. COMMUNITY definition and attributes8COMMUNITYDefinitionA group of PERSONs and/or ORGANIZATIONs that share common characteristics such as PLACE, circumstance, etc.ExamplesResidents of a city or townCommutersCarersThe long-term unemployedLow-income familiesThe tourism industryThe retail sectorFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataCOMMUNITY_IDIntegerType of communityCommunity of…Placedemographic attributescommon interestsimilar circumstances Geographical scope of communitydescription which scope this community (city? Borough? Nation?)6+1 categoriesYes/NoBoolean6+1 categories that community  Women / Youth / Elders / LGBTQ+ / Ethnic minorities / Disabilities / Economically disadvantaged groupVarcharADMIN_DIV_IDother notes/description on this communityVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesThe STATE of a COMMUNITY can be tracked without having to know the identity of each person and Organisation. For example, DEMOGRAPHICs will feed this entity, not person or organisation. A COMMUNITY might be composed of more than one COMMUNITY. For example:* the business sector might be composed of the industrial sector, the tourism sector, the financial services sector* the youth of a town are contained in the residents of a town.The actual PERSONs or ORGANISATIONs might change without changing the identity of a COMMUNITY, for example the long-term unemployed in a city remains the same COMMUNITY even though some people have left it, and others have joined it.Members of a COMMUNITY do not need to be aware of each other and are not acting with a collective goal. If they are, then they are an ORGANISATION. For example, the long-term unemployed is a COMMUNITY, whereas the jobseekers’ club is an ORGANISATION.Figure . COMMUNITY entity relationship diagramORGANISATION Table 12. ORGANISATION definition and attributes9ORGANISATIONDefinitionA group of people (PERSONs) with a common purpose/ PLAN And RESOURCEs and TIME and capabilities to make DECISIONsExamplesa public sector body, a municipality, a charity, a businessFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of DataORGANISATON_IDOrganisation CodeIntegerName of ORGANISATON Organisation nameVarcharType of ORGANISATIONPrivate/ Community groups/ Research / Public VarcharADMIN_DIV_1_ID City where they are registered inIntegerCOMMUNITY_IDThe community which this group represent or supportIntegerRelationshipsSee below diagramFigure : ORGANISATION entity relationships PERSON Table 13. PERSON definition and attributes10PERSONDefinitionAn individual person with agency over actions who belongs to a geographical boundary having DEMOGRAPHIC data can belong to ORGANISATIONS, live in a city covered by a PLANExamplesParticipant in the survey Participant in the meetingFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataPERSON_IDIntegerCOMMUNITY IDORGANISATION IDThe organization that the person is involved inIntegerRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesIt needs to be anonymised and uses only to identify their ORGANISATION and COMMUNITY when the project collects the dataFigure .  PERSON entity relationship diagramSTATISTICSTable 14. STATISTICS definition and attributes11STATISTICSDefinitionIt is collected statistics that describe the STATE of residents (COMMUNITY) within a certain administrative area. It is a sub-concept of PUBLIC_DATABASE and METRICs. ExamplesDemographicsHealth and well-being statisticsFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataSTAT_IDSTAT codeIntegerCOMMUNITY_IDCommunity which these statistics about Collection dateDateDateScopedescription which scope this STATISTIC about (city? Borough? Nation?)VarcharADMIN_DIV_IDGeography boundary code that this DB is aboutIntegerData fields of statisticsVarcharResults sharedLinkOther notes / description on these statisticsVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure .  STATISTICS entity relationship diagramCITIZEN_GENERATED_DATATable 15. CITIZEN_GENERATED_DATA definition and attributes12SURVEYDefinitionCITIZEN_GENERATED_DATA is done in the EVENT such as meeting or workshops with participants to record the state. This includes quantitative survey data and structured qualitative data (e.g. text from the meetings or interviews) ExamplesCITIZEN_GENERATED_DATA on the perception of citizen control CITIZEN_GENERATED_DATA to record the participant informationFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataDATA_IDCitizen generated data set codeIntegerPERSON_IDRespondent codeEVENT_IDWhen the survey is collectedIntegerMETRIC_IDThe metric which this survey feedsIntegerThe data fields of the dataThis data fields are different in each set of dataVarcharDescription of the dataPurpose and target of the dataVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . CITIZEN_GENERATED_DATA entity relationship diagramPUBLIC_DATABASETable 16. PUBLIC_DATABASE definition and attributes13PUBLIC_DATABASEDefinitionThis entity includes public data bases which are not statistics such as planning documents, building data base, and public GIS data. Examplesplanning documentsbuilding data base public GIS data Fields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataDB_IDDB codeIntegerORGANISATION_IDOrganisation that owns the databaseIntegerPublication date of this public document DateDateScopedescription which scope this Public document about (City? Borough? Nation?)VarcharADMIN_DIV_IDGeography boundary code that this DB is aboutIntegerLink of document The online link of published document LinkOther notes / description on the public documentVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . PUBLIC_DATABASE entity relationship diagramCOUNTRYTable 17. COUNTRY definition and attributes14COUNTRYDefinitionThe highest level of geographic boundary containing cities. ExamplesThe UKItalyFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataCOUNTRY_IDCountry codeIntegerName of countryCountry nameIntegerPOPULATIONNumber of people recorded as living in the countryIntegerAREAArea of the countryFloatRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesSome metrics, statistics or public database can use COUNTRY as geographic referenceFigure . COUNTRY entity relationship diagramADMIN_DIV_1Table 18. ADMIN_DIV_1 definition and attributes15ADMIN_DIV_1DefinitionThe city level geographic boundary containing borough.ExamplesOrvieto PotsdamLondonFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataADMIN_DIV_1_IDID number of the administrative divisionIntegerName of CityCity in which administrative division belongsIntegerCOUNTRY_IDCountry where city is locatedIntegerPOPULATIONNumber of people recorded as living in admin_area_1IntegerAREAArea of administrative areaFloatRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesSome metrics, statistics or public database can use ADMIN_DIV_1 (city) as a geographic referenceFigure . ADMIN_DIV_1 entity relationship diagramADMIN_DIV_2Table 19. ADMIN_DIV_2 definition and attributes16ADMIN_DIV_2DefinitionThe borough level geographical boundary containing neighbourhoods.ExamplesLambeth (London); Scalo (Orvieto)Fields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataADMIN_DIV_2_IDID number of the administrative divisionIntegerName of BoroughBorough in which administrative division belongsIntegerADMIN_DIV_1_IDCity where borough is locatedIntegerAREAArea of administrative areaFloatRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesSome metrics, statistics or public database can use ADMIN_DIV_2 (borough) as a geographic reference Figure . ADMIN_DIV_2 entity relationship diagramADMIN_DIV_3Table 20. ADMIN_DIV_3 definition and attributes17ADMIN_DIV_3DefinitionThe smallest geographical boundary. In the UK system, it is the ward level that is often understood as the neighbourhood.ExamplesVauxhall (div 3), Lambeth (div 2), London (div 1)Fields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataADMIN_DIV_3_IDID number of the administrative divisionIntegerName of NeighbourhoodCity in which administrative division belongsIntegerADMIN_DIV_2_IDBorough where the neighbourhood is locatedIntegerAREAArea of administrative areaFloatRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesData at the neighbourhood level can be helpful to identify the most disadvantaged area.  Therefore, we aim to collect data at this level wherever possible.Figure .  ADMIN_DIV_3 entity relationship diagramLOCATIONTable 21. LOCATION definition and attributes18LOCATIONDefinitionThe actual physical location such as address of building or location of sensorExamplesThe location of sensorThe location of buildingFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataLOCATION_IDID number of the administrative divisionIntegerADMIN_DIV_3_IDID number of the administrative division IntegerDescriptionOther description of this locationVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . LOCATION entity relationship diagramBUILDINGTable 22.  BUILDING definition and attributes19BUILDINGDefinitionThe building including residential and industrial buildings. ExamplesA residential buildingCommercial Industrial facilitiesFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataBUILDING_IDBuilding codeIntegerType of buildingUse of the building (residential, commercial, educational, industrial, etc.)IntegerAddressAddress of this building VarcharLOCATION_IDLOCATION of the buildingRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . BUILDING entity relationships diagramNBS_PROJECTTable 23. NBS_PROJECT definition and attributes20NBS_PROJECTDefinitionNature Based Solution that is implemented in the city through DivAirCity plan or other previous plans.  This entity only covers the physical interventions among the outcomes from DivAirCity plan. It is a part of city object.ExamplesGreen wallGreen bus stopFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataNBS_IDNBS codeIntegerName of NBSName of NBSVarcharType of NBSGreen wall/green roof etc.VarcharPLAN_IDPlan which implements this NBS IntegerLOCATION_IDLocation of this NBSVarcharDESCRIPTIONOther description of this NBSVarcharProject area of NBS (ha)Area which is assumed to be affected by this NBS (it will be used in GI-Val)FloatYEAR_BUILTYear when this NBS is builtIntegerRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . NBS_PROJECT entity relationship diagramThe below table presents the current status of the metadata definition of NBS which is aimed to be used as a centralised data structure for the EU NBS projects. The main function of this NBS Data Management Plan, being developed by the EU NBS project Data Management Task Force group, is to provide users with useful information on below:- Identify the presence of indicators and measurements collected to monitor a NBS case study;- Know how to access and use the historical measurements;- Evaluate the usability of the data in specific application contexts;- Know the systems and procedures used for data production;- Know the methods and frequency of data updating.AttributeExampleNote and commentsDataset titlePollutants removed in GenovaDataset descriptionTotal amount of pollutants removed from air in the city of GenovaDataset type [base line data, control data, post implementation data]control dataMeasurements uncertainty or constraintsScale levelCity• Landscape or regional scale• City scale• Neighbourhood scale• Street or pedestrian scale• Nature-based solution footprint scaleLocationGenovaLocation (lat,long)4847478,3945161Area of interventiongeojson file with points, multipoligon, poligonProcessing levelQuality controlled data• Raw data• Quality controlled data• Final data productsIndicators-Total PM10 removed-Total CO removed Indicators will be a list from the handbookRaw data will be a free text fieldAcquisition regimeContinous• Continuous data acquisition (Data are generated on a continuous basis)• Demand driven data (Data are generated on demand)• Once-off data (Data are generated only once in this configuration. No further observations in this configuration can be expected)• Periodic data collection (Data are generated at regular intervals)Frequencyevery 15 minutesSpatial Resolution40square metersContact nameName Surname of the contact personContact mailabc@efg.comData collection methodRemote sensing- Observations - Remote sensing- Surveys & Census- Laboratory experiments- Existing data sources- Modelling- MapsMethod detailsIOT device for environmental monitoringLast UpdatedApril 19, 2021, 10:26 AM (UTC+02:00)Collection start date01/01/2021Collection end date01/02/2021Tags-Airquality-pollutants-NBSLicenceCreative Commons AttributionChallengesAir quality1. Climate resilience2. Water management3. Natural and climate hazards4. Green space management5. Biodiversity enhancement6. Air quality7. Place regeneration8. Knowledge and social capacity building for sustainable urban transformation9. Participatory planning and governance10. Social justice and social cohesion11. Health and well being12. New economic opportunities and green jobsOrigin of the dataProject nameUNaLabtags-NBS-water management-climate resilienceProject sitewww.unalab.itContact personabc@efg.comNBS types-Green walls-BioswalesNBS sub typesaccording to the handbook chapter 4How the data are stored?Repository descriptionUNaLab open data portal based on CKANDataset pagehttp://ukb-ckan.unalab.eng.it/organization/genovaDataset APIhttp://ukb-ckan.unalab.eng.it/dataset/pollutants-concentration/resource/62f2d7cc-9dbf-47b0-bd9c-a53065cc9a0cSTREET_FURNITURETable 24. STREET_FURNITURE definition and attributes21STREET_FURNITUREDefinitionStreet furniture is objects placed or fixed in the street for public use.ExamplesLamp postBenchBus stopFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataSTREET_FURNITURE_IDThe street furniture codeIntegerType of objectBus stop/lamp post/LOCATION_IDLocation of the street furnitureIntegerother notes/description on this city objectVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramFigure . STREET_FURNITURE entity relationship diagramSENSOR Table 25. SENSOR definition and attributes22SENSOR DefinitionIt is an individual SENSOR implemented in cities.  It is a sub-concept of CITY OBJECT.  ExamplesAir pollution sensorPortable sensorFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataSENSOR_IDSensor codeIntegerType of sensorVarcharNBS_PROJECT_IDThe NBS project which the sensor aims to monitorIntegerBUILDING_IDThe building that the sensor is attached to IntegerSTREET_FURNITURE_IDThe street furniture that the sensor is attached toIntegerLOCATION_IDLocation of the sensorother notes/description on this measurementVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramFigure . SENSOR entity relationship diagramSENSOR_MEASUREMENTTable 26. SENSOR_MEASUREMENT definition and attributes23SENSOR_MEASUREMENTDefinitionIt is a sub-concept of EVENT. An EVENT in which a STATE of SENSOR is recordedExamplesSensor readingFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataMEASUREMENT_IDMeasurement codeIntegerPERSON_IDReporterSENSOR_IDSensor which is measured IntegerMETRIC_IDMetric which this measurement feedsIntegerCollection dateDate of measurement DateCollection timeTime of measurement Time The data fields of this measurementIt can be different depending on the types of sensors and aim of measurement Descriptionother notes/description on this measurementVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . SENSOR_MEASUREMENT entity relationship diagramRESOURCETable 27. RESOURCE definition and attributes25RESOURCEDefinitionA RESOURCE is available to an AGENT to allocate to SERVICEs and PLANs to achieve OBJECTIVEs.ExamplesPublic fundingPrivate investmentFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataRESOURCE_IDID of the resourceIntegerORGANISATION_IDID of organization which has this resourceIntegerPLAN_IDID of the plan which this resource usesIntegerSERVICE_IDThe ID of the service which uses this resourceIntegerDescriptionDescription of the resourceVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . RESOURCE entity relationship diagramMETRICTable 28. METRIC definition and attributes25METRICDefinitionA measure of demography, characteristics, activity orperformance. ExamplesPerformance indicator Deprivation indexTraffic countFields of entity(Attributes)AttributeDescriptionType of dataMETRIC_IDID of metricIntegerTARGET_IDThe target which this metric is calculated to meet The data fields of this metricother notes/description on this metricVarcharRelationshipsSee below diagramNotesFigure . METRIC entity relationship diagram
Appendix 4: Data Sharing Agreement GuidanceThe below guidance is extracted from the UK, NHS Data Sharing Agremeent (DSA). A template word file can be accessed via this link. Completing the Data Sharing Agreement 1. Between [parties]This section details which organisations the agreement is between. All parties need to be listed here. It does not include organisations which are processing data on behalf of the parties named in this section. If there are numerous controllers that this DSA will cover, you could complete an Appendix.2. Purpose or objective of the information sharingClearly and concisely state the purpose of the information sharing and what it is intended to achieve here. You can have as many purposes as required, but if these purposes cover a variety of intentions, then you may be best served by grouping the purposes into similar themes (e.g. provision of service planning or research) and having a separate DSA for each theme. For individual care it is not usually necessary to have a data sharing agreement.  If you have also completed a DPIA for the project, you can reference it here, so that both the DPIA and DSA could be read together.3. Controller(s)List all organisations which are controllers as part of this DSA here. You can have as many controllers as necessary.A controller is an organisation which decides the purpose of, and the manner in which, personal data is to be processed. If you are deciding why you are doing something, then you are the controller. If you have a statutory duty to process personal data (because the law sets out the purpose for which you are processing personal data or you are required by law to process data for a specific purpose), then you will be a controller. If you are deciding the purpose for the processing and another organisation decides how this will be done, then both organisations will be joint controllers. Organisations may be sole or joint controllers, and each has slight differences in relation to being accountable for compliance with data protection legislation. A sole controller is responsible for its own compliance with all aspects of data protection, whereas in joint controller situations, responsibilities for compliance may be allocated between each party that is a joint controller. Where responsibilities are shared, it needs to be clearly documented which organisation/s is responsible for which parts of data protection legislation. 4. Processor(s)List all organisations which are processors and sub processors as part of this DSA here.A processor is any organisation which is processing personal data on behalf of a controller. These can be public and private sector organisations but can only act under written instructions given to it by the controller. There must be a written data processing contract between a controller and processor, covering the requirements listed in Article 28 of the UK GDPR, and a processor may not use a sub-processor without first obtaining written permission from the controller. Sub-processors do not need to sign the DSA.5. Data items to be processedList here the data items that are to be processed as part of this DSA. Each item needs an explanation of why it is necessary to share it to achieve the purpose/s listed in the DSA, unless these items are detailed in the DPIA for the project/programme (in which case you would just need to make reference to the DPIA in this section).Data items can be grouped in reasonably understood headings to save listing every individual item. Examples might include demographic data (to save listing name, address, etc) or test results (to cover all types of tests).The minimum amount of personal data and information should be shared to achieve the purpose/s. You should start from a position of sharing anonymous data, and then add data items until you have the minimum necessary to achieve the purpose required. Wherever possible, you should try and achieve your purpose using anonymous data.6. Article 6 Condition – personal dataState here which of the six Article 6 processing conditions you are relying on to process personal data. Note that you cannot rely on the legitimate interests condition if you are a public authority processing data to perform your official tasks.7. Article 9 Condition - special category dataState here which of the ten Article 9 processing conditions you are relying on to process special category personal data. Information relating to a person’s health is classed a special category, and so to share it as part of the DSA, you need to identify an Article 9 condition. Usually this will be 9 2 (h) for healthcare, but the controllers listed in this DSA need to identify this condition for themselves, depending upon the purpose of the sharing.Organisations may also wish to state which Schedules (if any) apply to the processing of special category data (this can be found in Schedule 1, Part 1 of DPA18).8. Individual rights and preferences State here how you will manage data subject’s rights. For example (and not exhaustive):1. How will Subject Access Requests (SARs) be handled?2. Who (and how) will complaints be managed?3. How will objections to the data sharing be managed?4. Does the National data opt-out apply to this data sharing? 9. Compliance with duty of confidentiality or right to privacyYou will need to demonstrate how you will be satisfying the duty of confidence. For the type of sharing which is appropriate for a Data Sharing Agreement this can be satisfied in one of two ways:1. Consent – the patient or service user has consented, under common law, to the sharing. See guidance on the IG portal on consent. 2. Statutory gateway – the law allows or requires you to share this information for this purpose, such as support under section 251 of the NHS Act 2006.  Data Sharing Agreements are unlikely to cover disclosures where the common law duty of confidence is set aside due to overriding public interest; such decisions should be made on a case by case basis rather than being covered by a DSA.Where you are relying on a statutory gateway, it is important to state which piece of legislation (including the section) you are relying on and to ascertain whether or not the gateway provision for the duty of confidentiality is to be set aside.Data sharing between the parties must also comply with Article 8, Human Rights Act 1998 (the individual's right to family and private life). 10. Transparency UK GDPR places a duty of transparency on organisations – being able to show data subjects how their information is processed and who can access it, along with the basis for this. You need to show in this section how you will be meeting this duty, for example, by setting out that you have included information in your privacy notice and on your website11. How will the data sharing be carried out?This section should detail how personal data will be shared between organisations (for example, by secure email) and what security measures are in place to protect data from inappropriate disclosure or a breach of security. It should also detail which organisation is responsible for which elements of sharing and security.If any outputs or analysis are to be shared by organisations, this needs to be explained here, along with an explanation of why sharing this output will be acceptable, necessary and proportionate (for example, the outputs are anonymous).Frequency of data sharing also needs to be stated here - Is it a one-off share or regular sharing of data between organisations? If so, then the frequency also needs to be stipulated here. If information is being transferred outside the EU, you must stipulate this here and what safeguards are in place to protect the data.It may be helpful to add a data flow diagram to illustrate the proposed data sharing. 12. Accuracy of the data being sharedIt is important that all data shared by the parties in the DSA is as accurate and as up to date as possible. Organisations must make all reasonable efforts to ensure the accuracy of their data prior to sharing it with other parties.Efforts to check for accuracy could include checking with the patient or service user when they are in contact with services (and when appropriate to do so), or double checking against other sources (where reasonable and proportionate).Organisations should start from the position that information being shared with them from or by other parties is accurate and shared in good faith.13. Rectification of data that has been sharedThere may be occasions when inaccurate information (held in good faith) is shared with other parties. Should any factually inaccurate information have been shared with other organisations, then the responsibility lies with the organisation identifying the inaccuracy to notify the source organisation. It may also be necessary to inform the data subject of the sharing of inaccurate information, and what actions have been taken to rectify the situation. It will also be important to know who the information has been shared with as data subjects have the right to know which organisations have accessed their data.14. Retention and disposal requirements for the information to be sharedState here how long the shared information will be retained for, what will happen to it once it has reached the end of that retention period and criteria to be used to determine retention. Disposal doesn’t always mean destruction and the parties signed up to the DSA need to agree what will happen to the data. Options could include destruction of the data (with permission of the source organisation), return to the source organisations for onward management or destruction, or longer retention (with justification). The NHS Records Management Code of Practice may support you with this.15. Breach managementIf a breach occurs, then you need to document how this will be managed by the relevant parties. It is impossible to document here the process for each type of breach, but the main types should be covered here – an example being inappropriate or accidental disclosure, or loss of data. See further information about reporting breaches to the ICO.16. Specify any particular obligation on any party to this agreementThere may be occasions in relation to the data sharing, that one party may have a specific obligation or task that the others do not have. If so, these need to be listed here, stating what the obligation is, and which party is responsible for it.17. Contacts – Information Governance (IG)Each party needs to provide the contact details of:1. Their Single Point of Contact (if relevant)2. Their Information Governance Lead, or the person responsible for IG in their organisation.3. Their Caldicott GuardianContact details for processors do not need to be included. If a processor needs contacting regarding IG then this should be done via the controller who they are accountable to.If the contacts details change, then the relevant party must inform the others as soon as practicably possible.18. Commencement of agreementThe date of when the DSA commences is put here. This might not be the date the DSA is signed. It might be at a time in the future, to allow processes to be established prior to information being shared.19. Review of agreementThe DSA must be reviewed on a regular basis to ensure that it remains current and fit for purpose. Outline here how this will be completed and what circumstances may trigger a review (such as change in legislation or a party deciding to leave the agreement).20. Review periodThe DSA will need to be reviewed on a regular basis, and the parties can decide how long that review period will be. The purpose for the DSA will contribute towards determining the review period. For example, a long-term sharing programme may review the DSA every two years, but a DSA for high-profile sharing or a sensitive issue may be reviewed every six months. A one-off DSA will not need a review as once the data is shared, the purpose is finished, and so the DSA ends.21. VariationIf a party wishes to change any part of the DSA, then the process for doing so should be outlined here.22. Ending the agreementA party (or parties) to the DSA may wish to end their involvement at any time. This section details how a party serves notice on its involvement in the DSA, what notice period applies and more importantly how the data of the leaving party will be managed.23. End dateEach DSA requires an end date on which it ends – whatever reason this may be. When the DSA is reviewed, this date can be changed in light of the revisions.The end date relates to when the sharing will stop. After this date, some elements of processing may continue to fully close down the activity, such as returning data to the original provider or archiving data into a secure location.24. SignatoriesThe DSA is not valid unless it is signed by appropriate individuals authorised to do so by each organisation. Their details and designation should be listed here. The level of signatory should correspond to the profile of the data sharing (for example, the more sensitive or complicated the purpose, the more senior the required signatory).
Appendix 5: DivAirCity Indicator SpecificationsAll factsheets are available at Wiki (https://divairwiki.eco-wise.co.uk/bin/view/Main/) and those will be compiled here in a later versionData cluster 1.1. People and governance indicators1.1.1 Actors AvailableFrom project: N/A - created for DivAirCity project.Social challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:A) Understanding & establishing co-creation   Level of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescriptionThis indicator covers various statistics regarding the actors available for taking part in the DivAirCity process. This includes:The total number of NGOs dealing with DivAirCity-related issues operating within each city/ project area.Number of schools in the area + just outside it. Number of children attending these schoolsNumber of people using social facilities (e.g.  elderly centres and refugee centres) The proportion of stakeholders participating in the discovery phase. Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Borough (but the list of NGOs can include the NGO working at city level) Data source and input typePublic statisticsGIS datasets (school location)Participation phase respondent answersConnection with SDGsGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesGoal 16: Peace, justice and strong institutionsGoal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired DataNumber of NGOs per project area who have roles relating to areas of DivAirCityNumber of schools and kindergartens in and just outside city districtNumber of children living in district and going to kinder garden or school inside/just outside city district and living outside district but going to school/kindergarden inside district Number of people using social facilities (e.g.  elderly centres and refugee centres) Proportion of different stakeholders and population groups 6+1 participating in the discovery phase co-creation activities (measured in tick off participation – to the extent that it is impossible to identify individuals)Expected OutputsSome of these datapoints (e.g. location of schools) are more useful as GIS point/vector data.  Calculation methodsWhen you have a draft list of stakeholders, map their relations to each other, the space and the project. Use the Created by chappara from the Noun Project matrix template to position each stakeholder considering their level of power and affinity. If useful, draw lines and arrows between stakeholders to represent their relations, using different colours for each type of relation (a green line to identify collaborative relations, a red line for conflict relations etc.). The term power refers to the institutional, financial and/or social influence of an actor on the decision-making process of the project. The term affinity refers to the political, financial and/or social interest and commitment of an actor to the project.Level of expertise requiredBasicLinks and referenceshttps://jamboard.google.com/d/1FW5Lq58rRrUccs2ov4MZ3apKW3V2bKKDuYnlCXugeLE/viewerchrome extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/viewer.html?pdfurl=https%3A%2F%2Funhabitat.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2F2021%2F03%2F02032021_her_city_publication_low.pdf&clen=24640133&chunk=truehttps://www.stakeholdermap.com/stakeholder-matrix.html
1.1.2 Participatory CultureSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:A) Understanding & establishing co-creation   Level of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescriptionThis indicator describes pre-existing action plans in each of the cities, as well as the extent to which citizens volunteer involvement in task forces and NBS and their associated perception of their level of control in these decisions and the extent to which they have trust in the decision-making processes which take place. Within this there are several key metrics:The total number and list of existing relevant action plans in the cities (air quality action plan; sustainable energy and climate action plan, action plans in place; carbon emissions of the transport infrastructure and industry). Citizen participation/volunteering in co-governance task force/board for city DivAirCity projects (composition according to 6+1 and consistency of members)Experience with citizens science activities at city/district level – citizens having participated in citizens science; stakeholder with co-governance of citizens science projectsScale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhood Data source and input typeUnstructured public data including public documentsData collected manually by the project personnelConnection with SDGsGoal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired Data* List of existing relevant action plans in the cities* Type of action plans: air quality action plan. Sustainable energy and climate action plan, Action plans in place Carbon emissions of the transport infrastructure and industry* NBS projects implemented in the plan (if there are any)* Participating local organisations their types (local councils, civic society organisation) * Existence of citizen science elementExpected OutputsProviding the baseline to compare the impact of DivAirCity intervention (2.2.1, 2.2.2, 3.3.3)Calculation methodsN/ALevel of expertise required Links and references 1.1.3 Public private partnership supportSource: Developed from cited papers below by EcoWise for DivAirCitySocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThere is no single definition of a PPP but broadly they are interactions between public and private sector actors in which public purposes are served (Koonts & Thomas, 2012). When designed well and implemented in a balanced regulatory environment, PPPs can bring greater efficiency and sustainability to the provision of public services such as energy, transport, telecommunications, water, healthcare, and education. PPPs can also allow for better allocation of risk between public and private entities (World Bank, 2019).FROM KOONTS & THOMAS, 2012: The classiﬁcation scheme presented here is based on the criterion of control (i.e., carried out by government or third parties), which echoes the typology used by Frederickson and Frederickson (2006), and is based on one of the multiple dimensions Salamon (2002) used to classify policy tools (Koonts & Thomas, 2012).  Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhoodProject AreaData source and input typePPP contractsConnection with SDGsGoal 16: Peace, justice and strong institutionsGoal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired DataThe number of pre-existing public-private partnerships in the area of intervention which support participatory processes.Examples of types of public private partnership programmes and related data are belowGrants and cost-sharing programs:number and dollar amounts of grants and contracts awarded to recipientsregulatory programs: number of rules written, standards set, monitoring actions, and citations issued.infrastructure construction and maintenance programs:physical condition of infrastructureresearch programs:data gathered and papers writtenextent to which data + papers are used by other people e.g. citations.Technical assistance programs:how such assistance is used by target populationsExpected OutputsInformation about PPPs following the end of these partnerships compared to before. Calculation methodsAnalysis of contracts and outputs Level of expertise requiredMediumLinks and referencesWorld Bank, 2019. Public-Private Partnerships. Public-Private Partnerships Overview: Development news, research, data | World BankKoonts, T.M. & Thomas, C.W. 2012. Measuring the Performance of Public-Private Partnerships: A Systematic Method for Distinguishing Outputs from Outcomes. Public Performance & Management Review, 35:4, 769-786
1.1.4 Population composition / statisticsNot from another project, created by EcoWise for DivAirCity using sources below.Social challenge/ impact linked to:SocialLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionCensus data can be used Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighbourhoodData source and input typeCensus data on population informationConnection with SDGsGoal 3: Good health and well-beingGoal 5: Gender equalityGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesRequired DataTotal population in city/districtPopulation density (population per square meter)Female/male proportion of populationProportion of population under 15 years of ageProportion of population of 60 years or olderProportion of population with ethnic minority backgroundBreakdown of population by income bracketsBreakdown of population by current occupationBreakdown of population by educational backgroundExpected OutputsStatistical informationCalculation methodsN/ALevel of expertise requiredBasicLinks and referencesThe Interpretation of Small Area Census Data on JSTOR
1.1.5 Access to technologyCreated by EcoWise for DivAirCity projectSocial challenge/ impact linked to:Social / EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionDigital access is an important indicator of socioeconomic development, but it varies considerable across age and economic backgrounds. In DivAirCity we base this index on the Australian Digital Inclusion Index, (ADII), which has been developed recently enough to be relevant compared to historic studies which focus on computer ownership and ignore technological shifts such as tablets and smart phones. The index can be found here: The ADII - Australian Digital Inclusion IndexThe ADII has three main components scored out of 100: Access, affordability, and digital ability.  Each of these are made up of several components sourced from questionnaire data. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighbourhood Project AreaData source and input typeSURVEY or STATISTICSConnection with SDGsGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired DataAccess: * Frequency of digital technology use (daily screen time)* Connection type (fixed broadband vs mobile data only)* Data allowance and speed* Types and number of devices (including desktops, laptops, smart phones, tablets, and an array of smart home devices).* An intersectional category with digital gaps related to income level, age, educational level Survey example: Frequency of internet access:* Have ever accessed internet* Have accessed internet in last three months* Access internet dailyPlaces of internet access:* Have accessed internet from home* Have accessed internet away from home* Number of internet products:* One or more internet products* Two or more internet products Internet TechnologyComputer technology:* Have personal computer or tablet computer in householdMobile internet technology:* Own or use mobile phone* Have mobile internet Internet Data AllowanceMobile internet data:* Have mobile internet* Have mobile internet data allowance over 1GB* Mobile internet data allowance relative to benchmarkFixed internet technology:* Have fixed broadband* Have cable or nbn fixed broadbandFixed internet data:* Have fixed broadband* Have Fixed Broadband data allowance over 10GB* Fixed Broadband data allowance relative to benchmarkExpected OutputsBreakdown the population and score of each section to compare with average It means, in terms of the number of devices, when the maximum is 100 (for someone who ticked all the device) the National average is 33.1 and the population over 75 shows 17.5 Calculation methodsSurvey interpretationdimensions are equally weighted in the construction of the total Index to derive an overall score from 0-100. Level of expertise requiredMedium Links and referencesThe ADII - Australian Digital Inclusion IndexSelhofer, H. and Hüsing, T., 2002, November. The digital divide index–a measure of social inequalities in the adoption of ICT. In Proceedings of the Xth European Conference on Information Systems ECIS (pp. 1273-1286).https://www.digitalinclusionindex.org.au/dashboard/Access.aspxSeifert, A. and Rössel, J., 2021. Digital participation. In Encyclopedia of Gerontology and Population Aging (pp. 1446-1450). Cham: Springer International Publishing.Hofmann, M., Münster, S. and Noennig, J.R., 2020. A theoretical framework for the evaluation of massive digital participation systems in urban planning. Journal of Geovisualization and Spatial Analysis, 4(1), pp.1-12.Morrison, C., 2016. Digital participation: a national framework for local action. Digital Scotland. white_paper_vf-final-march2020.pdf (asu.edu)How to make digital participation inclusive? (citizenlab.co)
1.1.6 Affordability of technologyCreated by EcoWise for DivAirCity projectSocial challenge/ impact linked to:Social / EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionDigital access is an important indicator of socioeconomic development but it varies considerable across age and economic backgrounds. In DivAirCity we base this index on the Australian Digital Inclusion Index, (ADII), which has been developed recently enough to be relevant compared to historic studies which focus on computer ownership and ignore technological shifts such as tablets and smart phones. The index can be found here: The ADII - Australian Digital Inclusion IndexThe ADII has three main components scored out of 100: Access, affordability, and digital ability.  Each of these are made up of several components sourced from questionnaire data. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighbourhood Project AreaData source and input typeSURVEY or STATISTICSConnection with SDGsGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Data Affordability:* Ratio of household income to median cost of internet bundle for ideally connected single-headed and family household (the internet bundle contains quality + reliable connectivity through fast service and unlimited data allowance through both broadband and 4G/5G.* 3 different gaps in technology: access, use and upgrade* an intersectional category with digital gaps related to income level, age, educational level Expected Outputs  Calculation methodsSurvey interpretationLevel of expertise requiredMedium Links and referencesThe ADII - Australian Digital Inclusion IndexSelhofer, H. and Hüsing, T., 2002, November. The digital divide index–a measure of social inequalities in the adoption of ICT. In Proceedings of the Xth European Conference on Information Systems ECIS (pp. 1273-1286).https://www.digitalinclusionindex.org.au/dashboard/Affordability.aspx
1.1.7 Digital AbilityCreated by EcoWise for DivAirCity projectSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionDigital access is an important indicator of socioeconomic development but it varies considerable across age and economic backgrounds. In DivAirCity we base this index on the Australian Digital Inclusion Index, (ADII), which has been developed recently enough to be relevant compared to historic studies which focus on computer ownership and ignore technological shifts such as tablets and smart phones. The index can be found here: The ADII - Australian Digital Inclusion IndexThe ADII has three main components scored out of 100: Access, affordability, and digital ability.  Each of these are made up of several components sourced from questionnaire data. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighbourhood Project AreaData source and input typeSURVEY or STATISTICSConnection with SDGsGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Data* Digital Ability:* Self-assessed surveys allow people to score themselves for the following categories:* Basic operational: Including downloading and opening files, connecting to the internet, and setting passwords.* Advanced operational: Including saving to the cloud, determining what is safe to download, customising devices and connections, and adjusting privacy settings.* Information navigation: Including searching and navigating, verifying trustworthy information, and managing third party data collection.* Social: Including deciding what to share, how, and who with, manage and monitor contacts, and communicate with others.* Creative: Including editing, producing, and posting content, as well as a broad understanding of the rules that may apply to these activities.* Automation: Including connecting, operating, and managing smart devices and IoT technologies.* Attitudes* An intersectional category with digital gaps related to income level, age, educational level Expected OutputsIndividual Index dimensions are equally weighted in the construction of the total Index to derive an overall score from 0-100. Calculation methodsSurvey interpretationLevel of expertise requiredMedium Links and referencesThe ADII - Australian Digital Inclusion IndexSelhofer, H. and Hüsing, T., 2002, November. The digital divide index–a measure of social inequalities in the adoption of ICT. In Proceedings of the Xth European Conference on Information Systems ECIS (pp. 1273-1286).https://www.digitalinclusionindex.org.au/dashboard/Digital.aspx
Data cluster 1.2. Participation and Governance Dynamic Indicators1.2.1 Target audiences for the NBS to be designedSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:B) Define & co-designingLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input type• SURVEY or MANUAL_INPUTConnection with SDGs• Goal 5: Gender equality• Goal 10: Reduced inequalities• Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities• Goal 13: Climate action• Goal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired Data• Total number of participants in the event• 6+1 categories of participants • Organizations participated• Time and location of the event• The phase of co-creation of the event• Engagement tools used • The description of decision made in the meeting if there is anyExpected Outputs• Total number of participants • social position of participants Calculation methods• total number of 6+1 groups into the breakdown and per cent  Level of expertise requiredLinks and references https://jamboard.google.com/d/1FW5Lq58rRrUccs2ov4MZ3apKW3V2bKKDuYnlCXugeLE/viewer
1.2.2 Users and use of green spaces for diversityDescriptionThis KPI measures the recreation opportunities available by urban green infrastructure.This KPI aims to measure the increase of opportunities related to green infrastructures (Derkzen et al. 2015), being valued for recreation, social interaction, education and supporting healthy living (satisfaction).Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhoodData source [ link to data framework]SURVEY, observation, or other participatory methodsURBAN GreenUP approach: Focus group questionnaireHer City approach:Participant assessment by observing the local green spacesData needsURBAN GreenUP approach: Recreation opportunities scored by focus groupThe availability of recreation opportunities can be measured considering different elements: types of urban green infrastructure; degree of naturalness; aesthetics; scenic beauty; and presence of water. Users were asked to score these elements according to the relative importance. Scores were discussed during a focus group.Her City approach:Systematic observation with assessment form (very good-good-fair-poor-very poor) on the following section: Number and variety of users accessing the public spaceNumber and variety of activities observed in the public space among time and spaceAdditional data needs for DivAirCity: 6+1 information of assessors Expected OutputsLevel of uses and usability of green spaces in the neighbourhood according to 6+1 groups Calculation methodsURBAN GreenUP approach: Baseline and post-intervention measurements of user engagement with NBS through walking and cycling, types of activity undertaken in/with NBS (other than walking and cycling), frequency of interaction with NBS. Reported as frequency count data (interactions/week) (number of visitors, number of recreational activities) (Number of cultural events, people involved, and children in educational activities) value (Kabiisch and Haase 2014).Surface measurements shall be calculated with Geographical Information Systems (GIS). A Social Survey shall be calculated with the measurement of a questionnaire through standard software (Excel or SPSS).Her City Approach:Average based on the 5 Likert scale assessments by participants Links and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D2.4 - Monitoring program to Valladolid. https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d2-4-- -monitoring-program-to-valladolid.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D3.4 - Monitoring program to Liverpool https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d3-4-- -monitoring-program-to-liverpool.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D4.4 – Monitoring program to Izmir https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d4-4-- monitoring-program-to-izmir.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D5.3: City Diagnosis and Monitoring Procedures https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d5-3- city-diagnosis-and-monitoring-procedures.kl Questionnaires applied to the population for the recreational and cultural benefits of green spaces (Kabisch and Haase, 2014).Derkzen, M.L., van Teeffelen, A.J.A., Verburg, P.H., 2015. Quantifying urban ecosystem services based on high resolution data of urban green space: An assessment for Rotterdam, the Netherlands. J. Appl. Ecol. 52, 1020–1032. doi:10.1111/1365-2664.12469QGIS 3 – Userguide. https://www.qgis.org/en/site/ QGIS Development Team 2013.QGIS Geographic Information System. Open-Source Geospatial Foundation. URL http://qgis.osgeo.org
1.2.3. Comfort and safety [of green spaces for diversity]Social challenge/ impact linked to:Social / EnvironmentalLevel of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* Neighborhood Data source and input type• Primary data: Survey (5 Likert survey) Connection with SDGs* • Goal 3: Good health and well-being• Goal 5: Gender equality• Goal 10: Reduced inequalities• Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesRequired Data• 5 Likert survey • Diversity and inclusion survey for 6+1 information of the assessor (the gender, age band, ethnic groups, sexual orientation, and disability) Expected Outputs• Perception of safety & level of security of the public space• Quality of sensorial experience• Overall comfort using the public space, through maintenance, design and ambiental conditions• Presence of a public space identity, defined by cultural background and users' enjoymentCalculation methods• level of comport and safety by average Likert scales of the answers Level of expertise required• MediumLinks and references• https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2020/07/final_pssa_v.1_reviewed_compressed.pdf• https://hercity.unhabitat.org/
1.2.4 Level of Digital ParticipationNew indicatorLinked to project: U_CODE (Urban Collective Design Environment)Social challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:B) Define & co-designing     Level of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescriptionFrom the Encyclopedia of Gerontology and Population Aging (Seifert & Rössel, 2021).The term digital participation refers to the active involvement in digital society through the use of modern information and communication technology (ICT), such as the Internet. This participation includes access to not only the Internet but also various online services and content. Non-participation in the digital world could lead to a feeling of social exclusion, whereas a feeling of social inclusion may be induced by having access to the Internet as well as the willingness and skills to use it.Participation is important to ensure just and equal measures. Increasingly this must involve digital participation to allow the involvement of larger and more diverse actors in decision-making (Hofmann et al. 2020).  Several components are important for participation to be successful and fair:representativeness of 6+1 groups proportional to their Inclusiveness (the opportunity and ability of all participants to equally contribute)Internal transparency (at any time in the process it should be clear where the process is headed and what + why the next step is being taken)facilitation of deliberation (participants must understand each other and take on others' perspectives).Internet access has been desribed as a "right", and furthermore its inequality is revealed by the link between digital exclusion and social deprivation (Digital Scotland).Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input typeData collected manually by the project personnelConnection with SDGsGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Dataactual digital participation measured during processesNumber of green blockchain contracts downloaded following interventionExpected OutputsStats on populations digital access allowing for online participation (1.1.7) vs actual digital participation measured during processes. Number of green blockchain contracts downloaded following intervention.Calculation methods Level of expertise requiredHighLinks and referencesSeifert, A. and Rössel, J., 2021. Digital participation. In Encyclopedia of Gerontology and Population Aging (pp. 1446-1450). Cham: Springer International Publishing.Hofmann, M., Münster, S. and Noennig, J.R., 2020. A theoretical framework for the evaluation of massive digital participation systems in urban planning. Journal of Geovisualization and Spatial Analysis, 4(1), pp.1-12.Morrison, C., 2016. Digital participation: a national framework for local action. Digital Scotland. white_paper_vf-final-march2020.pdf (asu.edu)How to make digital participation inclusive? (citizenlab.co)
1.2.5 Accessibility [of green space]Social challenge/ impact linked to:Environmental Level of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* Neighbourhood Data source and input type* Survey or other participatory methodsConnection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 16: Peace, justice and strong institutionsRequired Data* Survey (Very good-good-fair-poor-very poor)* Accessibility and presence of qualitative and inclusive facilities for private vehicles* Accessibility and presence of qualitative and inclusive facilities for bikes* Accessibility and presence of qualitative and inclusive facilities for pedestrians* Accessibility and presence of qualitative and inclusive facilities for public transports* 6+1 information of assessors Expected Outputs* level of accessibility of green spaces in the neighbourhoodCalculation methods* Average based on the 5 Likert scale assessments by participants Level of expertise required* Medium (to devise the survey and train the assessors) Links and references* https://hercity.unhabitat.org/
1.2.6 Perceived control and trust over decision-makingSocial challenge/ impact linked to:Social Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionPerceived control is the belief in our ability to successfully influence the environment, and it plays a large role in how people actually interact with their environment (Wang et al. 2021). Psychologically, there are benefits to being able to exert control on one's environment and so individuals are biased towards behaviours that give them an enhanced perception of control (Wang et al. 2021). However, evidence suggests that when multiple people all try to exert control this can lead to sustainable outcomes being hampered (Wamsler et al. 2020) and as such citizen control must be allocated in a structured, targeted way to balance involvement of 6+1 groups with effective governance. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhood Project AreaData source and input typeSurveyConnection with SDGsGoal 16: Peace, justice and strong institutionsRequired DataSurvey questions:On a scale of 1-5, how much control do you feel you have had over the NBS solutions being implemented?Expected Outputs1 represents no control at all, 5 represents complete control. Calculation methodsSurvey resultsLevel of expertise requiredBasicLinks and referencesWang, K.S., Yang, Y.Y. and Delgado, M.R., 2021. How perception of control shapes decision making. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 41, pp.85-91.Wamsler, C., Alkan-Olsson, J., Björn, H., Falck, H., Hanson, H., Oskarsson, T., Simonsson, E. and Zelmerlow, F., 2020. Beyond participation: when citizen engagement leads to undesirable outcomes for nature-based solutions and climate change adaptation. Climatic Change, 158(2), pp.235-254.Kwei, M.G. and Kweit, R.W. 2007. Participation, Perception of Participation, and Citizen Support. American Politics Research, 35(3), pp. 407-425.
1.2.7 Target audiences for the NBS to be validatedSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:C) Materialising & co-implementingLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* Project AreaData source and input type* SurveyConnection with SDGs* Goal 5: Gender equality* Goal 10: Reduced inequalities* Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities* Goal 13: Climate action* Goal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired Data* Types of participants (6+1 groups)Expected Outputs* Total number of participants * social position of participants Calculation methods* total number of 6+1 groups into breakdown and per cent  Level of expertise requiredLinks and references*  https://jamboard.google.com/d/1FW5Lq58rRrUccs2ov4MZ3apKW3V2bKKDuYnlCXugeLE/viewer
1.2.8 Target audiences for the NBS to be implementedSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:D) Ensuring sustainability  Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework• Project AreaData source and input type* SurveyConnection with SDGs* Goal 5: Gender equality* Goal 10: Reduced inequalities* Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities* Goal 13: Climate action* Goal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired Data* Types of participants (6+1 groups)Expected Outputs* Total number of participants * social position of participants Calculation methods* total number of 6+1 groups into breakdown and per cent  Level of expertise requiredLinks and references*  https://jamboard.google.com/d/1FW5Lq58rRrUccs2ov4MZ3apKW3V2bKKDuYnlCXugeLE/viewer
Data Cluster 1.3. Social multi-stage co-monitoring indicators1.3.1 Green intelligence awarenessFrom project URBAN GreenUPDescriptionChanges in behaviour and human attitudes are fundamental to achieve a more sustainable world, sothat, it is very interesting to analyse the potential of an activity or intervention to increase the green intelligence awareness of a population.There is enormous opportunity for nature-based solutions to promote understanding of sustainability in ways that positively influence citizen behaviour. There are many available resources to learn and understand the fragility of our environmental and the responsibility of humans to protect, preserve and respect the world. Therefore, this KPI aims to reflect how the intervention is used for educational purposes and enhancement of public awareness.The Green intelligence awareness is opened to all educational and social groups, no matter what isthe level of education (Post-graduate, university, school, basic education).Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhood Data source and input type Data collected manually by the project personnel.Connection with SDGsGoal 4: Quality educationGoal 8: Decent work and economic growthGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesData needsThis KPI is expressed as the Sum of the educational activities per year, and sum of the publications with educational content per year (editorial). The register is recorded separately, because the concept and magnitude of each result are different.Expected OutputsThe KPI “Green intelligence awareness” is calculated as the Quantify the number of activities, publications or campaigns focused on the enhancement of green intelligence awareness per year, related to a NBS.Calculation methodsThere are two different categories: Educational activities and Communication activities.1) Educational activities:The educational activities considered have to be directly or indirectly related with the URBAN GreenUP project. In the “Directly” category there are actions of the themes and NBS of the project.There can be also considered educational actions “Indirectly” related with the URBAN GreenUP project: These are activities organized by other entities and stakeholders different from the URBAN GreenUP Consortium, which are about the URBAN GreenUP general themes, such as climate change, green infrastructure, nature-based solutions, sustainability, water management, resources efficiency, etc.The measurement of the KPI “Green intelligence awareness” by educational activities is expressed in the number of activities and number of recipient people (attendees):a) Number of educational activities (nº activities/month). We differentiate among classes: courses, conferences/symposia, lectures, workshops, seminars, guided tours.b) Number or people that attends to the educational activities (nº attendee/activity/class), for instance, number of people that attends to a Climate Change congress. This category could becharacterized according to its characteristics: Educative level (University, school), average age, sector (architect, parks and gardens, industry, mobility, biomass).There will be recorded a monthly record. There will be identified the NBS or related theme, such as climate change, Nature Based Solutions and others.2) Communication activities.This second group considers publications in different communication means such as written press (newspaper, magazines, articles, brouchers), television, radio and social media.Editorial actions:Articles, texts, photographs or videos published in magazines, newspapers, books with technical and educational content.Distribution of brochures, leaflets.Communication actions:Online social networks campaigns (YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, other) with technical and educational content.The measurability of KPI is also expressed as the size of the audience that is exposed to the communication activity impact (number of retweets and likes in Twitter, number of likes and shares in Facebook, number of plays in YouTube, etc.)It is important to consider that all educational activities must be developed in the municipality of Valladolid, or must be dedicated about Valladolid (for instance, a magazine from other Spanish region that talks about Valladolid interventions in the URBAN GreenUP project).The KPI is calculated monthly. There will be calculated a total KPI annually, with will generate at least three indicators (numbers): Number of activities per year, Number or people that attends to the educational activities and Number of publications per year.The result could be expressed as ratios, for a similar period of time (month, year)For instance, 12a/6p means 12 activities and 6 publications per year related to a NBS in particular.Links and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D2.4 - Monitoring program to Valladolid. https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d2-4---monitoring-program-to-valladolid.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D3.4 - Monitoring program to Liverpool https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d3-4---monitoring-program-to-liverpool.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D4.4 – Monitoring program to Izmir https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d4-4--monitoring-program-to-izmir.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D5.3: City Diagnosis and Monitoring Procedures https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d5-3-city-diagnosis-and-monitoring-procedures.kl“Educating for a Sustainable Future: a Transdisciplinary Vision for Concerted Action”. UNESCO, November 1997.1.3.2 AQEshort – Air quality indicators: short term health effectsTopicUrban challengesSub-challengesSocial4 - Public Health and Well-being4.3 - HealthDescriptionThe ASE estimates the number of preterm deaths due to ozone short-term exposure in urban areas (O3). The WHO REVIHAAP project argues that despite the many respiratory outcomes associated with O3, mainly adverse health outcomes with known baseline rates are suited for health impact assessments. Evidence from time-series studies of short-term exposure to O3 suggest that health impact assessment calculations can be undertaken for a range of end-points, including all-age, all-cause mortality (WHO 2013a). There is still scientific debate whether the effects on mortality of long-term exposure to O3 are well enough documented to be included in health impact assessments. Multi pollutant models in the largest European study of short-term exposure (APHEA2) reported short-term exposure increases of total mortality by approx. 0.3% per 10 µg m-3 using the daily 8-h or 1-h maximum, in a linear manner without a significant threshold (Gryparis et al. 2004). A WHO meta-analysis for the AQ guidelines (2003) reported a relative risk of 0.3% per 10 µg m-3 increase with the 95% (CI 0.1–0.4%) which we see as a robust exposure– response assumption to apply. WHO REVIHHAP conclude that the epidemiological evidence supports calculations that use all-year coefficients for daily maximum 8-h O3 (scaled from the 1-h measures reported in the literature), including adjustment for PM10. It is also recommended that health impact calculations for short-term exposures assume linear concentration–response relationships. Since the epidemiological evidence on linearity does not extend down to zero, appropriate cut-off points for health impact assessments are therefore recommended: at 10 ppb (20 µg m-3) for daily maximum 8-h O3 and at 35 ppb (70 µg m-3), for consistency with previous work using SOMO35 data (WHO 2013). Given the uncertainties in the effects of long-term exposure to O3 (see the REVIHAAP report) it was suggested that health impact assessments for long-term exposure and respiratory and cardiopulmonary mortality are undertaken as a sensitivity scenario. It is recommended the coefficients from single pollutant models from the American Cancer Society cohort study (Jerrett et al. 2009) are used, assuming an association exists within the range of O3concentrations studied. The WHO HRAPIE Project recommended use of a meta-coefficient from The APHENA Study (results from 32 European cities) of a 0.3% increase (95% CI 1.4 – 4.3) per 10 µg m-3 increase in daily maximum 8-h O3 (Katsouyanni et al. 2009) and cut-off at 35 ppb (SOMO35).Scale as linked to D2.2 framework? City? NeighbourhoodData source [ link to data framework]? population data (baseline rate and number of exposed persons)? exposure-response relationship (relative risk)? climate data (estimated mean exposure)Needs* Expected Outputs? numerical value (number of preterm deaths to ozone short-term exposure)Calculation methods? Population data have been obtained for each city, region or country. For Stockholm national data for 2012, with a spatial resolution of 100?100 m2, have been obtained from Swedish statistics. For Bologna and Amsterdam/Rotterdam, a 1 * 1 km2 population grid disaggregated data has been applied (Gallego 2010). The data on baseline mortality are from national official sources, for Stockholm from Swedish statistics, for Bologna from the Bologna province statistics and for Amsterdam from Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. Baseline mortality for all ages for the city or region is used in combination with population exposure data for the city according to the HIA tool AirQ developed by WHO (2004), where the attributed mortality is calculated as:? ∆Y = (Y0 * P) * (e?*X – 1), where Y0 is the baseline rate; P the number of exposed persons; ? the exposure-response relationship (relative risk) and X the estimated mean exposure (with impact/above any assumed threshold). Calculations will build on the WHO HRAPIE recommendation assuming a 0.3% increase (95% CI 1.4 – 4.3) per 10 µg m 3 increase in daily maximum 8-hour ozone and with a cut-off at 35 ppb (70 µg m-3) (SOMO35).Links and referencesWHO 2013a: Review of evidence on health aspects of air pollution – REVIHAAP Project Technical Report. Copernicus Climate Change Service Urban SIS D4.3 Indicators for urban assessments, C3S_441 Lot3 Urban SIS, D4.3 22 Copenhagen.WHO 2013b: Health risks of air pollution in Europe – HRAPIE. Recommendations for concentration-response functions for cost-benefit analysis of particulate matter, ozone and nitrogen dioxide. CopenhagenWHO 2016. European Health For All Database. http://data.euro.who.int/hfadb/WHO 2016: Healt risk assessment of air pollution – general principles, Copenhagen. http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/298482/ Health-risk-assessment-air-pollution-General-principles-en.pdf?ua=
1.3.3 AQElong – Air quality indicators: long term health effectsTopicUrban challengesSub-challengesSocial4 - Public Health and Well-Being4.3 - HealthDescriptionThe ALE estimates the number of deaths in age group 30+ associated with long-term exposure to urban background levels of PM2.5 and NO2. Relative risks based on recommendations from WHO HRAPIE Project (WHO, 2013b) regarding PM2.5 and UK COMEAP (2015) regarding NO2. Estimates are presented both separately and combined for exposure to both pollutants. It has long been recognized that particle concentrations correlate with mortality, both temporally (short-term fluctuations) and spatially based on mortality and survival (WHO 2003, WHO 2006a). Short term effects are usually assumed to be included in the long-term impacts on mortality. Particles in ambient air (indicated by PM2.5) are one of the major causes of preterm death in Europe, but also exposure to NO2 and ozone has been associated with mortality. The WHO Review of evidence on health aspects of air pollution (REVIHAAP, WHO 2013a), concludes that recent long-term studies are showing associations between PM and mortality at levels well below the current annual WHO air quality guideline level for PM2.5 (10 µg m-3). The WHO expert panel thus concluded that for Europe it is reasonable to use linear exposure response functions, at least for particles and all-cause mortality, and to assume that any reduction in exposure will have benefits. The findings from REVIHAAP are used as a basis for the WHO Project Health risks of air pollution in Europe – HRAPIE (WHO 2013b). The conclusions from the HRAPIE project (Heroux et al. 2015) are implemented in cost-benefit calculations done by EMRC/IAASA for the European Union. For the WHO HRAPIE impact assessment (WHO 2013b) for long-term exposure to PM2.5 and all cause (natural) mortality in ages 30+ recommended use of exposure-response function from a meta-analysis of 13 cohort studies (Hoek et al. 2013). The RR for PM2.5from this meta-analysis was 1.062 (95% CI 1.040-1.083) per 10 µg m-3 is similar to the 1.06 per 10 µg m-3 increment of the annual average PM2.5 of the American Cancer Society Cohort Study (Pope et al. 1995). This assumption (6% per 10 µg m-3) has been used in many health impact assessments. Although, different types of particles and reasoning explain the impacts on mortality (WHO 2007, WHO 2013a), the WHO REVIHAAP panel of experts consider current knowledge does not allow precise quantification of the health effects of PM emissions from different sources. Current risk assessment should consider particles of different: sizes, sources and composition, as equally hazardous to health (WHO 2007). Practice has treated both PM10 and fine fraction PM2.5 (quite often considered to be more detrimental to health than the coarse fraction of PM10) as being equally toxic by mass, irrespective of the origin. Thus, commonly exposure-response functions obtained using urban background PM2.5 as the exposure indicator are converted to be used for PM10 through a factor based on their mass relation. In the new impact assessment HRAPIE no such conversion is recommended for PM10 and mortality. Different types of PM have been assumed to influence mortality differently; e.g., ExternE3 (2005) includes assumptions about the toxicity of other different types of PM. This reflects results that indicate a higher toxicity of combustion particles, especially from internal combustion engines. They treat nitrates as equivalent to half the toxicity of PM10, sulphates as equivalent to PM10, primary particles from power stations as equivalent to PM10, and primary particles from vehicles as equivalent to 1.5 the toxicity of PM2.5. Effects of combustion-related particles have been studied using black smoke, black carbon (BC) or elemental carbon (EC) as the exposure variable. REVIHAAP (WHO 2013a) recommended that BC should be used as exposure variable in more studies but did not recommend it to be used for the HRAPIE impact calculations (WHO 2013b). A review of mortality and long-term exposure to the combustion-related particle indicators (Hoek et al. 2013) used different methods. Their relation and conversion factors have been described before (Janssen et al. 2011). All-cause mortality was significantly associated with EC, the meta-analysis resulted in a (relative risk) RR of 1.061 per 1 µg m-3 EC (95% CI 1.049-1.073), with highly non-significant heterogeneity of effect estimates. Most of studies assessed EC exposure without accounting for small-scale variation related to proximity to major roads. These results suggest that using the common RR for long-term exposure to PM2.5 and mortality, may lead to an underestimation of impacts of particle mass from motor vehicle exhaust.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework? City? Neighbourhood ? Street? HouseholdData source [ link to data framework]? population data (baseline rate and number of exposed persons)? exposure-response relationship (relative risk)? climate data (estimated mean exposure)NeedsExpected Outputs? numerical value (number of preterm deaths to ozone long-term exposure)Calculation methods? deaths/year ordeaths/year/100.000 inhabitants? Population data have been obtained for each city, region or country. For Stockholm national data for 2012, with a spatial resolution of 100?100 m2, have been obtained from Swedish statistics. For Bologna and Amsterdam/Rotterdam, a 1 * 1 km2 population grid disaggregated data has been applied (Gallego 2010). Baseline mortality in age group 30+ for the city or region is used in combination with population exposure data for the city according to the HIA tool AirQ developed by WHO (2004), where the attributed mortality is calculated as:? ∆Y = (Y0 * P) * (e?*X – 1),? where Y0 is the baseline rate; P the number of exposed persons; ? the exposure-response relationship (relative risk) and X the estimated mean exposure (with impact/above any assumed threshold).? The data on baseline mortality are from national official sources, for Stockholm from Swedish statistics, for Bologna from the Bologna province statistics and for Amsterdam from Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. The estimated mortality is presented both for a normalized population of 100 000 inhabitans on each grid (without using local population data from the city, the impact reflecting the concentrations only) and as mortality based on local population data.Links and referencesCOMEAP 2015: Interim Statement on quantifying the association of long-term average concentrations of nitrogen dioxide and mortality. Public Health England, COMEAP: reports and statements. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ uploads/attachment_data/file/485373/COMEAP_NO2_Mortal ity_Interi m_Statement.pdfEMRC/IIASA 2014: Implementation of the HRAPIE Recommendations for European Air Pollution CBA work. Mike Holland, EMRC. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/air/pdf/CBA%20HRA PIE%20implement.pdf 
1.3.4 Morbidity, Mortality and Years of Life Lost due to poor air-qualityProject Name: UNaLabPillar of Sustainable DevelopmentSocietal challengePlanet5 - Air QualityDescriptionReduction in years of life (Y) due to premature mortality in comparison with standard life expectancy(Morbidity): Long-term (annual) incidence of chronic bronchitis due to poor air quality calculated using atmospheric NO2 and PM10 data(Mortality): Long-term (annual) incidence of mortality due to poor air quality calculated using atmospheric PM2.5, PM10, O3 and NO2 dataScale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighborhood StreetData source [ link to data framework]air quality monitoring networkCensus information re. mortalityData needsi) involved pollutants and their air concentration levels,ii) health indicators analysed in terms of morbidity and mortality,iii) affected age groups, andiv) exposure timeExpected OutputsDaily, weekly, monthly or annual measurementsCalculation methodsThe general approach in health impact assessment is to use exposure-response functions, linking the concentration of pollutants to which the population is exposed to the number of health events occurring in that population (Costa et al., 2014; Silveira et al., 2016). Therefore, the following aspects are usually considered: i) involved pollutants and their air concentration levels, ii) health indicators analysed in terms of morbidity and mortality, iii) affected age groups, and iv) exposure time. The health response is usually calculated by:Morbidity (chronic bronchitis) due to poor air quality is calculated using NO2 and PM10 to determine CRF and ?C in the preceding equation.Mortality, assessed as total mortality, is calculated using PM10, PM2.5, O3 and NO2 to determine CRF and ?C in the preceding equation.Both morbidity and mortality are based on long-term (annual) effects (Table). Where air quality data are derived from WRF-Chem results can be calculated on a daily/weekly/monthly/annual basis at the grid, neighbourhood or city scaleYears of life lost (YoLL) is an often-used health indicator, and refers to the total number of years of reduced life due to premature mortality. Using the mortality indicator, the YoLL can be calculated as the number of deaths multiplied by a standard life expectancy at the age at which death occurs (see Gardner & Sanborn, 1990)Links and referencesCosta, S., Ferreira, J., Silveira, C., Costa, C., Lopes, D., Relvas, H., … Teixeira, J.P. (2014). Integrating Health on Air Quality Assessment-Review Report on Health Risks of Two Major European Outdoor Air Pollutants: PM and NO2. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health - Part B Critical Reviews, 17(6), 307-340.Gardner, J.W., & Sanborn, J.S. (1990). Years of potential life lost (YPLL) – what does it measure? Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 1(4), 322–329.Pascal, M., Corso, M., Ung, A., Declercq, C., Medina, S. & Aphekom. (2011). APHEKON-Improving knowledge and communication for decision-making on air pollution and health in Europe, Guidelines for assessing the health impacts of air pollution in European cities, Work Package 5, Deliverable D5. Saint-Maurice, France: French Institute for Public Health Surveillance.Silveira C., Roebeling P., Lopes M., Ferreira J., Costa S., Teixeira J.P., ... Miranda A.I. (2016). Assessment of health benefits related to air quality improvement strategies in urban areas: An Impact Pathway Approach. Journal of Environmental Management, 183, 694-702     
1.3.5 Level of chronic stressSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThere is compelling evidence in the effects of nature or forests on various health aspects. Most of them are interested in stress related outcomes like decreased heart rate variability and effects on brain waves. Continuously recorded data using wearable devices such as continuously recorded electroencephalographic (EEG) or heart rate seem options to monitor individual symptoms in relation to green spaces.  Effects of green space exposure on mental and physical health has been an interesting research field in the last years, especially regarding the impact of growing cities and increased traffic. Therefore, in DivAirCity we might identify synergistic effects of nature-based solutions on mental and physical health. There are different health effects regarding of space and time scales. A couple of studies are concerned with indoor or outdoor settings as well as effects of short-term or long-term exposure. The following publications cover such aspects and can be further divided in outcome related to mental or physical symptoms. Especially the older and diseased population (COPD, Asthma) suffer from air pollution related symptoms. Mobile Sensing can be a source of objective data:Chaix, B. (2018). Mobile Sensing in Environmental Health and Neighbourhood Research. Annu Rev Public Health, 39, 367-384.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* Project AreaData source and input type* Patient Reported Outcomes (Qualitative)* Sensor data (Quantitative)Connection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-beingRequired Data* Patient Reported Outcomes (Qualitative)* Sensor data (Quantitative)Expected Outputs* Walkability* Mood Map * Vital signs: HRV, EDA, EEG * Validated questionnaires (WHO-5)* Heart rate variability* Electrodermal activity* Electroencephalography * Quality of life (WHO-5)* mental functioning (RAND-36)Calculation methodsLevel of expertise required* HighLinks and references* Hunter, M. R., Gillespie, B. W., & Chen, S. Y. (2019). Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress in the Context of Daily Life Based on Salivary Biomarkers. Front Psychol, 10, 722.* Herman, K., Ciechanowski, L., & Przegali?ska, A. (2021). Emotional Well-Being in Urban Wilderness: Assessing States of Calmness and Alertness in Informal Green Spaces (IGSs) with Muse—Portable EEG Headband. Sustainability, 13, 2212. * Reeves, J. P., Knight, A. T., Strong, E. A., Heng, V., Neale, C., Cromie, R. et al. (2019). The Application of Wearable Technology to Quantify Health and Wellbeing Co-benefits From Urban Wetlands. Front Psychol, 10, 1840. 
1.3.6 Health monitoring of diverse groupsSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:   E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance 1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* National* City* NeighbourhoodData source and input type* Official statistics Connection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Data* respiratory diseases of 6+1 groups groups* Obesity of 6+1 groups groups* Morbidity, Mortality and Years of Life Lost of 6+1 groupsExpected Outputs* Proportion of population with obesity for children measured in BMI* respiratory diseases (e.g., asthma) of BAME  * Estimated change to Morbidity, Mortality and Years of Life Lost of 6+1 groups due to air quality
1.3.7 Health inequalities during the COVID-19 pandemicNew indicator for DivAirCitySocial challenge/ impact linked toSocialLevel of importance High Importance / must haveDescriptionMarginalised groups experienced health inequalities before the COVID-19 pandemic, which acted to compound and worsen these failures.“COVID-19 has not only brought infection and death but also increased the vulnerability of the socially and economically deprived (Patel et al., 2020) and exposed the levels of digital inequality in society (Beaunoyer et al., 2020)” – Kwan et al. 2021.Mental health prevalence has also increased due to isolations and a lack of access to mental health services during the pandemic. This is especially true for those living in deprived inner-city locations where green space access is more limited.Furthermore there is a perception that ethnic minority groups are ‘hard to reach’, in terms of healthcare provision and COVID-19 test kit distribution. This may arise from instructions on test kits being unsuitable for those who do not have English as a first language, as well as mistrust, and a perception that at-home testing kits are not a suitable substitute for something carried out in a laboratory (Dodds and Fakoya, 2020).Those in roles which are at the forefront of the pandemic response, including social care and health care, tend to focus more on human needs rather than social equality (Healy, 2008). During the pandemic as such, these groups did not help marginalised people fight for justice (Kwan et al., 2021).Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* National* CityData source and input type* Survey dataConnection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Data* Incidence of mental health complaints disaggregated by ethnic identities* Access to lateral flow test kits disaggregated by ethnic identities (from survey data)* Survey responsesExpected Outputs* Questionnaire responses to build a picture of why some groups are more vulnerable than others and why this may have been worsened by the pandemic.Calculation methods* Questions could include, but are not limited to:* Have you faced any of the following barriers to accessing government guidance throughout the COVID-19 pandemic?* Digital barriers* Language/ literacy* Information being insufficient* Has the pandemic limited your usual support services + social networks, and has this impacted the support you received?* Did you face any barriers to following guidance during the pandemic including shared housing, the ability to store food, or to obtain addictive substances?Level of Expertise Required* LowLinks and referencesKwan, C.K., Ling, H.W.H., Cheung, J.C.S. and Chui, E.W.T., 2021. Safeguarding health equality for the disadvantaged during the COVID-19 pandemic: Lessons learned for the social work profession. Qualitative Social Work, 20(1-2), pp.463-469.Dodds, C. and Fakoya, I., 2020. Covid-19: ensuring equality of access to testing for ethnic minorities. Bmj, 369.Doctors of the World, 2020. A Rapid Needs Assessment of Excluded People in England During the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic. covid19-full-rna-report.pdf (doctorsoftheworld.org.uk)
1.3.8 Gender Equality in Work and COVID-19 DeathsSocial challenge/ impact linked toSocialLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThere are more women than men who work in front-line health jobs which heightens their exposure to catching COVID-19. Gender segregation in occupations also affect the rate at which women and men are made redundant or furloughed during the pandemic, and globally women earn less than men so are financially more vulnerable to job loss. Women are also more likely to have greater caring responsibilities which are heightened by the closures of schools. Flexibility with working from home may also place a greater strain on women who have a need to balance this working from home with care work (Carli, 2020). COVID-19 deaths, furthermore, are higher in countries where women comprise a greater percentage of the full-time workforce.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework? National? CityData source and input type? Census dataConnection with SDGs? Goal 3: good health and wellbeing? Goal 5: Gender equalityRequired Data? women’s share of Covid-19 deaths? women share of the full-time workforce? gender disaggregated data on Covid-19 fatalities and cases? % of women in domestic workforce? % of job losses in domestic workforce as a result of the pandemic? % of health and social care workers who are women? % of health and social care COVID-19 infections who are womenExpected Outputs? Different statistics regarding the gender disaggregated impact of COVID-19Calculation methods? Percentages worked out and can be compared or averaged for an overall scoreLevel of Expertise Required? MediumLinks and referencesCarli, L.L., 2020. Women, Gender equality and COVID-19. Gender in Management: An International Journal.
1.3.9 Likelihood of dying from COVID-19 compared to White ethnicitySocial challenge/impact linked to   SocialLevel of importance DescriptionThis indicator measures the number of people per ethnic group who die from COVID-19.In the United Kingdom, Black women are 4.3 times more likely than white women to die from COVID-19 and black males are 4.2 times as likely to die (Azcona et al. 2020; ONS, 2020). This is one such inequality which existed pre-pandemic but has been worsened due to a variety of factors, including that more women work in front-line health jobs which heightens their exposure. Furthermore, migrant women and those from ethnic minority groups make up large proportions of these job roles further raising their exposure as well.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* National* CityData source and input type* Census data* Gender and ethnic minority-disaggregated dataConnection with SDGs* Goal 3: good health and wellbeing* Goal 5: Gender equalityRequired Data* Covid-19 deaths aggregated by ethnicity* Total number of people belonging to each ethnic groupExpected Outputs* Number of deaths per ethnic groupCalculation methods* Percentage of deaths per ethnic group as a proportion of that group’s incidence in the populationLevel of Expertise Required* LowLinks and referencesAzcona, G., Bhatt, A., Encarnacion, J., Plazaola-Castaño, J., Seck, P., Staab, S. and Turquet, L., 2020. From insights to action: Gender equality in the wake of COVID-19. United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women).Coronavirus (COVID-19) related deaths by ethnic group, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk)
1.3.10 Income & workSocial challenge/ impact linked to:Social / EconomicLevel of importance 1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionMonetary income is vital in a developed market economy where access to various aspects of Ife is largely determined by financial resources (either directly or indirectly). This was clearly identified as fundamental in the Oxfam workshop, as well as through secondary sources and discussions with stakeholders. The two main datasets used here for measuring poverty, HBAI and MIS, tell a similar story: that lone parents, single working-age households and couples with children are most likely to be in relative poverty.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighborhood Data source and input typeCensus Connection with SDGsGoal 1: No povertyGoal 2: Zero hungerGoal 8: Decent work and economic growthGoal 5: Gender equalityGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired DataEconomically active population in respect to the 6+1 groups unemployment rate in respect to 6+1 groups Households’ income in respect to the 6+1 groups Households’ composition (e.g., lone parents, gender of lone parents)Expected OutputsEconomically active populationIncome average and Income average of diverse groups% of unemployment and % of unemployment in respect to the 6+1 groups the lone parent household income and gender of lone parentsCalculation methodsEconomically active population: (employed + unemployed but seeking work) unemployment rate a relative measure set at 60 percent below the median household income, calculated after housing costs have been deducted to allow for a truer assessment of disposable income (HBAI,  AHC)the Minimum Income Standard (MIS)Level of expertise required Links and referencesthe Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF) and the Centre for Research in Social Policy at Loughborough Universityhttps://www.gingerbread.org.uk/what-we-do/media-centre/single-parents-facts-figures/https://www.lboro.ac.uk/news-events/news/2019/february/lone-parent-families-living-below-mis/1.3.11 PH - Perceived HealthTopicUrban challengesSub-challengesSocial4 - Public Health and Well-Being4.3 - HealthDescriptionPerceived health is a subjective measure of overall health status. Individuals' self-assessment of their health may include aspects that are difficult to capture clinically, such as incipient disease, disease severity, physiological and psychological reserves, and social function. Studies have demonstrated that this is a reliable and valid measure, associated with functional decline, morbidity and mortalityScale as linked to D2.2 framework* City* Neighbourhood * Project areaData source [ link to data framework]* The response of the participantNeeds* The response of the participantExpected Outputs* Numerical value on a lickert scale from 1 (very dissatisfied) to 5 (very satisfied). Calculation methods* NoneLinks and references* The World Health Organization Quality of Life (WHOQOL)-BREF © World Health Organization 1996, http://www.who.int/mental_health/media/en/76.pdf* The World Health Organization Quality of Life (WHOQOL)-BREF © World Health Organization 2004, http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/research_tools/en/english_ whoqol.pdf http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/research_tools/whoqolbref/ en1.3.12 Place attachmentProject Name: CONNECTING NaturePillar of Sustainable DevelopmentSocietal challengePeople6 - Place RegenerationDescriptionJorgensen and Stedman (2001):SOP is an individual’s favourable or unfavourable attitude toward spatially demarcated object. SOP can be inferred from responses of a cognitive, affective or conative nature.Place identity can be regarded as an individual’s cognitions, beliefs, perceptions or thoughts that the self is invested in a particular spatial setting.Place attachment can be defined in terms of an individual’s affective or emotional connection to a spatial setting.Place dependence can be considered as the perceived behavioural advantage of a spatial setting relative to other settingsScale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighbourhood StreetHouseholdObjectData source [ link to data framework]QuestionnaireData needsEssential: NBS characteristics for each city/site, more specifically objectives (long-term) and challengesDesirable: Data on symbolic/affective meanings assigned to NBS (case studies, participatory data collection methodsExpected OutputsPlace Identity Scale (Williams & Vaske, 2003).Items are presented in a 5-point “strongly disagree” (1) to “strongly agree” (5) format with a neutral point of 3.1. I feel “X” is a part of me.2. “X” is very special to me.3. I identify strongly with “X”.4. I am very attached to “X”.5. Visiting “X” says a lot about who I am.6. “X” means a lot to me.Sense of Place (SOP) inventory (Jorgensen & Stedman, 2001)Place Identity Items:1. Everything about my […] is a reflection of me.2. My […] says very little about who I am.3 I feel that I can really be myself at my […]4 My […] reflects the type of person I am.Place Attachment Items:1 I feel relaxed when I’m at my […]2 I feel happiest when I’m at my […]3 My […] is my favourite place to be.4 I really miss my […] when I’m away from it for too long.Place Dependence Items:1. My […] is the best place for doing the things that I enjoy most.2. For doing the things that I enjoy most; no other place can compare to my […] 3. My […] is not a good place to do the things I most like to do.4. As far as I am concerned, there are better places to be than at my […]Calculation methodsQuantitative P: Scale inventory/Questionnaire (survey procedure, paper-and-pencil administration, computer-based administration)T: Place Identity Scale (Williams & Vaske, 2003) comprising 6 items that measure place dependence and place identity as dimensions of place attachmentT: Sense of Place (SOP) inventory (Jorgensen & Stedman, 2001) - 12 items developed to measure the three dimensions of an attitude-based place attachment experience, namely: place identity, place attachment, and place dependence Qualitative P:T: case study methodology – structured interviews, case study analysisT: participatory data collections methods, such as collaborative participatory data collection, bodies as tools for data collection, photo elicitationLinks and referencesBernardo, F., & Palma-Oliveira, J. M. (2012). Place identity: a central concept in understanding intergroup relationships in the urban context. In H. Casakin, & F. Bernardo (Eds.), The role of place identity in the perception, understanding, and design of built environments (pp. 35-46) (Bentham). doi: 10.2174/97816080541381120101Bernardo, F., & Palma-Oliveira, J. M. (2016). Urban neighborhoods and intergroup relations: The importance of place identity. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 45, 239–251. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2016.01.010Brown, G., Raymond, C. M., & Corcoran, J. (2015). Mapping and measuring place attachment. Applied Geography, 57, 42-53. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.12.011Counted, V. (2016). Making sense of place attachment: Towards a holistic understanding of people-place relationships and experiences. Environment, Space, Place, 8(1), 7-32. Retrieved from https://www.vcounted.com/wp content/uploads/2018/01/Counted-ESP-Spring-2016.pdfJorgensen, B.S., & R.C. Stedman (2001). Sense of Place as an Attitude: Lakeshore owners attitudes toward their properties. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 21, 233-248. doi:10.1006/jevp.2001.0226Kim, J. , & Kaplan, R. (2004) Physical and psychological factors in sense of community: new urbanist Kentlands and nearby Orchard Village, Environment and Behavior, 36(3), 313-340.Kimpton, A., Wickes, R., & Corcoran, J. Do greener suburbs lead to greater residential place attachment? The Journal of Urban Policy and Research. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Anthony_Kimpton/public ation/267696092 _Greenspace_and_Place_Attachment_Do_Greener_Suburbs_Le ad_to _Greater_Residential_Place_Attachment/links/ 5bce75a1299bf1a43d9a3ecf/Greenspace-and-Place Attachment-Do-Greener-Suburbs-Lead-to-Greater-Residential Place-Attachment.pdfMohapatra, B., & Mohamed, A. R. (2013). Place attachment and participation in management of neighborhood green space: a place-based community management. International Journal of Sustainable Society, 5(3), 266-283.Xu, Y., Matarrita-Cascante, D., Lee, J. H., & Luloff, A. E. (2019). Incorporating Physical Environment-Related Factors in an Assessment of Community Attachment: Understanding Urban Park Contributions. Sustainability, 11(20), 5603. doi:10.3390/su11205603Williams, D., & Vaske, J. (2003). The Measurement of Place Attachment: Validity and Generalizability of a Psychometric Approach. Forest Science, 49, 830-840. Retrieved from https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/value/docs/psychometric_place _attachment_measurement.pdfWolf, K.L., Krueger, S., & Flora, K. (2014). Place attachment and meaning – A literature review. In Green Cities: Good Health (www.greenhealth.washington.edu). College of the Environment, University of Washington.http://www.placemakingchicago.com/about/power.asphttps://gehlinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/QUALITY-CRITERIA-FINAL.pdfhttps://gehlpeople.com/tools/twelve-quality-criteria/
1.3.13 Visual access to green spaceFrom Project: proGIregPillar of Sustainable DevelopmentSocietal challengePlanet3 - Green Space Management10 - Health and Wellbeing DescriptionSelf-reported amount of green space in the view from windows at home and the frequency of looking at the view.Visual access to green space is an indicator of exposure to green spaces. Previous experimental studies have shown short-term looking at green spaces could have mental health benefits such as reducing stress, restoring attention, and improving mood. An emerging body of evidence is also suggestive of the health benefits of the long-term visual exposure to green spaces.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhood StreetProject areaData source [ link to data framework]SurveyData needsQuestionnaire data regarding questions in calculation methods section:“At home, how much green space (trees, grasses, flowers, etc.) can you see through the following window(s)?”with possible answers on a scale from 0 (no green space/no window) to 4 (all of the view completely filled green space)“How often (during the day) do you look out through the following window(s)?”with possible answers on a scale from 0 (no window/never) to 3 (often)Expected OutputsTwo datapoints collected, once before the implementation of the nature-based solutions and once after.Calculation methodsThe indicator is obtained using a survey which is taken by a sample of the general population. The survey includes a section with the following questions: “At home, how much green space (trees, grasses, flowers, etc.) can you see through the following window(s)?” with possible answers on a scale from 0 (no green space/no window) to 4 (all of the view completely filled green space) “How often (during the day) do you look out through the following window(s)?” with possible answers on a scale from 0 (no window/never) to 3 (often) This survey is repeated before and after the implementations of NBS in order to observe a potential change in visual exposure to green and blue spaces.Links and referencesVan den Bosch et al (2015) Autonomic Nervous System Responses to Viewing Green and Built Settings: Differentiating Between Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Activity. Int J Environ Res Public Health; 12(12): 15860–15874Berto (2014) The role of nature in coping with psycho-physiological stress: a literature review on restorativeness. Behav Sci (Basel). 2014 Oct 21;4(4):394-409Bratman et al (2012) The impacts of nature experience on human cognitive function and mental health. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences; 1249(1): 118-136Abkar et al (2010) Influences of viewing nature through windows. Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences; 4(10): 5346-5351
1.3.14 Safety and securityDescriptionCC- Crime counts are statistical records collected mostly by the government bodies at the street, neighbourhood, or city levels. These are straightforward indicators of crime and useful to localize the events and categories of events. Practitioners governing or designing NBS may use this indicator in making tactical decisions (Bella et al 2015). For each crime category (rape, assault, theft, robbery etc), total number of incidents at a specific NBS, street, neighbourhood, or city can be collected, Average number of events per locality can be calculated as well.PCFS% - This indicator measures the percentage of citizens feeling safe or very safe.PC - Perceived crime is an indicator of people security that identifies the quality of life of the NBS users. If higher crime rates are perceived, people experience anxiety or fear of crime, decrease in the motivation to consume the NBS or participate the communal activities. So, high levels of perceived crime hinders benefits of the NBS such as personal health or social cohesion. Literature identifies that women, old, less educated people develop higher levels of fear of crime (Sulemana 2015).Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhood StreetData source [ link to data framework]CC- Statistical Records from Governmental BodiesPCFS% - SurveysPC - SurveysData NeedsCC- Police or Government recordsPCFS% - Questionnaire of citizensPC -- Questionnaire of citizens Perceived Crime questionnaire example: ‘How common are “……” (types of events such as assault, theft) in your local “….” (neighbourhood, street etc)?’The perception variable is ordinal and rated:1 (never happens); 2 (very rare); 3 (not common); 4 (fairly common); or 5 (very common).(Ambrey et al 2014)Expected OutputsCC- Numerical value and GraphicPCFS% - Percentage of citizens feeling safe or very safePC - Average “perception of crime types”Calculation methodsCC- Frequency CountsPCFS% - calculation of per cent from number of people feeling very safe or safe / Number of answers to the queryPC - Average “perception of crime types”Links and referencesAmbrey, Christopher L et al (2014) “Perception or Reality, What Matters Most when it comes to crime in your neighbourhood?” Social Indicators Research, 119, 877- 896.Bella, Enrico di, Matteo Corsi and Lucia Leporatti (2015) “A Multi-indicator Approach for Smart Security Policy Making,” Social Indicator Research, 122, 653-675.UN Indicators of Sustainable Development: Guidelines and Methodologies. http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/natlinfo/indicators/guidelines.pdfIndicators of the Sustainable and Emergent Cities Initiative of the Inter-American Bank of Development. https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/8132/Guia-Metodologica-Programa-de-Ciudades-Emergentes-y-Sostenibles-Tercera-edicion-Anexo-de-indicadores.pdf?sequence=1 
1.3.15 Equality in diversitySocial challenge/ impact linked to: SocialLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionTBDScale as linked to D2.2 framework CityData source and input typeSurvey on discrimination Hate crime rate Amsterdam doughnut case used an official survey (15% of residents reported experiencing discrimination in 2017, 39% of incidents concerned ethnicity or skin colour, and 29% concerned nationality) Connection with SDGs Goal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Datasurvey data Expected Outputs Calculation methods Level of expertise required Links and referenceshttps://doughnuteconomics.org/stories/1
1.3.16 WalkabilityDescriptionSpatial map indicating, for each pixel, the degree of walkability on a scale from highly walkable to least walkableGIS derived raster image, function of connectivity, accessibility and perceived pleasantness with values ranging from 0 to 1 where 1 indicates the most walkable area (e.g., a park with pedestrian lanes well connected to city hot spots like residential and working areas) and 0 indicates the least walkable area (e.g., a major urban road).Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhood StreetData source [ link to data framework]GIS dataremote sensing imagesor participatory methods with mobile sensorData needsPopulation densityRoad networksLand usePublic transportationExpected OutputsNormalized index (30-1000 m pixel)Calculation methodsRemote sensing and GIS software (e.g., ArcMap, Google Earth Engine, R) Calculated from Spatial data provided by city administrations and population data (e.g., Landscan Global population -https://landscan.ornl.gov/)Links and referencesFan, P., Xu, L., Yue, W., & Chen, J. (2017). Accessibility of public urban green space in an urban periphery: The case of Shanghai. Landscape and Urban Planning, 165, 177-192.
1.3.17 Heat induced mortalityDescriptionThe HIM indicates the number of deaths associated with temperatures above the 75th percentile of daily mean temperature during summer months (Apr-Sep). Relative risks extracted from a European multi-city study (de’ Donato et al. 2015) are used to describe the effect of high temperatures on mortality.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* City* NeighbourhoodData source    [link to data framework]* number of degree days above 75th percentile - air temperature (climate data Apr-Sep)* population data (baseline rate and number of exposed persons)* relative risk (RR)Data Needs* climate data, population data and relative risk dataExpected Outputs* annual output* numerical output* unit: deaths/year or deaths/year/100,000 inhabitantsCalculation methodsTemperature 75th percentile can be calculated (e.g. from Harmonie model output) at the location of an official weather station and then used in the evaluation of each grid cell. The determination of the temperature 75th percentile is made separately for the historical period and for the present window of the climate scenario (for the future window of the climate scenario, the same temperature 75th percentile as calculated in the present window is used). The evaluation period for health impacts of temperatures above the 75th percentile is the full year (this since for the future climate scenario there are temperatures above the thresholds also outside the period Apr-Sep). Relative risks (RR) are recalculated to represent the risk associated with a 1°C increase in daily mean temperature. These risk coefficients were aggregated to two regions (Southern and Northern Europe) as well as the mean for Europe. Thus, each city must be classified as belonging to one of these groups. Population data have been obtained for each city, region or country. For Stockholm national data for 2012, with a spatial resolution of 100?100 m2, have been obtained from Swedish statistics. For Bologna and Amsterdam/Rotterdam, a 1 * 1 km2 population grid disaggregated data has been applied (Gallego 2010). The estimated number of deaths are calculated as ∆Y = (Y0 * P) * (RR * Tdd) where Y0 is the baseline rate; P the number of exposed persons; RR the relative risk associated with a 1°C increase in temperature above the 75th percentile and Tdd is the number of degree days above the 75th percentile. The RR is scaled so that the total number of extra deaths for the entire city is equal to the number of deaths you would get if you used the daily temperatures from the location of the weather station for all the city population. This means that for present climate Urban SIS will just distribute spatially the impact to be stronger in more heated urban areas and lower in colder areas of the city. The scaling and the determination of the 75th percentile determined for the present climate is maintained for the future climate, thus allowing raising temperatures in the future to give a stronger health impact.Links and referencesAnderson BG & Bell ML 2009: Weather-related mortality: how heat, cold, and heat waves affect mortality in the United States. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 20, 205.Astrom DO, Forsberg B, Edvinsson S, Rocklov J 2013: Acute fatal effects of short-lasting extreme temperatures in Stockholm, Sweden: evidence across a century of change. Epidemiology, 24, 820-9.Baccini M, Biggeri A, Accetta G, Kosatsky T, Katsouyanni K, Analitis A, . . . Michelozzi P 2008: Heat effects on mortality in 15 European cities. Epidemiology, 19:5, 711-719. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e318176bfcd
1.3.18 Air quality and diversitySocial challenge/ impact linked to:Environmental Co-creation phase linked to:  E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance 1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThis indicator is only available when there is sufficient air pollution sensors to compare neighbourhoods or cities Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* CityData source and input type* Air pollution data* CensusConnection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 10: Reduced inequalitiesRequired Data* Relevant data include measured ambient air pollutant concentrations (lead, carbon monoxide, ozone, PM10, PM2.5, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide), Air Quality Index, and monitor information (location, monitoring objective). * Relevant data include populations (by year, county, census tract, census block group, census block,) race, ethnicity, age, sex, and income Expected Outputs* Percentage of children ages 0 to 17 years living in neighbourhoods with pollutant concentrations above the levels of the current air quality standards (By race/ethnicity and by family income)Percentage of days with good, moderate, or unhealthy air quality for children ages 0 to 17 years (By race/ethnicity and by family income)* * Calculation methods* State and local environmental agencies throughout the country operate monitors that measure concentrations of criteria pollutants in outdoor air. EPA compiles these measurements in the Air Quality System (AQS) database. For Indicators E1 and E2, these criteria pollutant measurements are compared to the levels of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), established by EPA under the Clean Air Act. Indicator E3 uses EPA’s Air Quality Index (AQI), which is calculated from data in the AQS database. The AQI is based on daily measurements of all the criteria pollutants except for lead. * Indicator E1 uses the AQS data to present the percentage of children ages 0 to 17 living in counties that have measured concentrations of a pollutant greater than the level of the current NAAQS for each criteria pollutant. Indicator E2 uses the AQS data to present the percentage of children ages 0 to 17 living in counties that have measured concentrations greater than the level of the current NAAQS for two particular criteria air pollutants: ozone and PM2.5. * Indicator E3 uses the AQI to present the percentage of days in each year considered to be in the categories of “good,” “moderate,” or “unhealthy” air quality for children ages 0 to 17.Level of expertise requiredLinks and references* https://www.epa.gov/americaschildrenenvironment/ace-environments-and-contaminants-criteria-air-pollutants
1.3.19 Inclusiveness of the ProcessFrom Interlace projectSocial challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:C) Materialising & co-implementingLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription(From Interlace project): There are numerous examples throughout the world of environment projects resulting in gentrification and forced displacement. Justice must therefore be ensured in any cocreation process. This comes in 3 types:distributional justice - concerns how access to green, nature-based amenities is distributed in society, and how the costs and benefits are distributed among the populationprocedural justice - levels and forms of civil participation in decision-making of urban nature interventions. To sort this out it is necessary to ask questions about:the extent to which the planning, design, implementation and evaluation of urban NBS projects are open to inputs by citizens,who is represented (or not) in these participatory processes,how much these processes in fact influence decision-making, andby whom and for whom is aim of justice being realized (taking into consideration that the role and impact of community participation relates to socio-cultural hierarchies and power structures, which can affect access to dynamics and outcomes of participation processesrecognitional justice - justice of different needs, values, and preferences that depend on people’s (intersectional) identities and characteristics, such as gender, race, age, ethnicity. Crucial for inclusivity to new spaces. TOOL1: Initial survey of cultural perceptions of natureGroup specific modes of engaging with and connecting to nature, influenced by:• How nature is valued and perceived• Cultural beliefs and values with respects to perception of nature• Purposes and experiences of activities in green spaces (e.g., idling or task-oriented recreation)• How group specific modes of engaging with and connecting to nature influence benefits from nature and needsTOOL 2: Social description map of the groupSocio-economic status (class)• Symbolic identifications of social status, identity labels• Effects of identities/social statuses on:• How nature is valued and perceived• How nature is engaged with and connected to• Degree of access to high quality green space• Purposes of visits to green spaces• Preferences and needs related to green spaces• Benefits from visiting green spaces• Unmet needsTOOL 3: Map of interrelationships in the group• Intersectionality (the advantageous and disadvantageous effect of group specific identities in context of other identities)• Differences of quality of neighbourhoods, districts• Differences in access to high quality green spaces• Gendered inequalities• Specific challenges for various groups of disabled people• Discrimination/stigmatization (e.g., ethnic groups, other minorities, such as migrants, sexual minorities)• Organisational capacity (e.g., neighbourhood associations, interest organizations, social movements, labour unions, lobby groups, etc.)• Influence on or participation in public (e.g., municipality) or local (e.g., neighbourhood associations) decision-making processes• Marginalization or exclusion from public (e.g., municipality) or local (e.g., neighbourhood associations) decision-making processes• Marginalization or exclusion from educational institutions, markets, etc.TOOL 4: Urban diagnosis based on socio-environmental analysis of the site• Socio-economic status of residents• Quality of infrastructures (housing, drainage, pipe water)• Degree/quality of urban planning• Risks related to unplanned/intense car traffic, pollution, contamination, negative effects of climate change• Degree of quality nature/green spaces in residential areas/neighbourhoods/ district• Distance to quality green spaces from residential areas• Adequate and affordable transportation to quality green spaces* • Accessibility in terms of risks related to car traffic and other infrastructuresScale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNeighbourhoodProject AreaData source and input typeSurveysConnection with SDGsGoal 5: Gender equalityGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesRequired DataSurvey responsesNumber of tools used to optimise the inclusiveness of the process (e.g. survey, mapping..)Expected OutputsSurvey responsesCalculation methodsSurvey responsesLevel of expertise requiredBasicLinks and referencesD1-6 INTERLACE VF Nov 2021 - Guidance on gender, cultural, and ethics-related considerations_0.pdf (interlace-project.eu)1.3.20 Index of transparency and fairness of the processFrom project INTERLACE.Social challenge/ impact linked to:SocialCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThis is an index based on how open the processes and outputs of the project are. It is very important to be transparent in all proceedings but also GDPR must be adhered to. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhoodData source and input typeDeliverable documentsMeeting minutes Process documentationConnection with SDGsGoal 16: Peace, justice and strong institutionsGoal 17: Partnerships for the goalsRequired DataRatio (%) of documentation on the process available and accessibleRatio (%) of proceedings made publicRatio (%) of transparency on participants involved in the process (names in the proceedings)Expected Outputs3 x percentage figures which can be averaged to provide the index figureCalculation methodsTake average of 3 specified figuresLevel of expertise requiredBasicLinks and references 
Data cluster 2.1. Urban assets & infrastructure indicators2.1.1 Building qualitySocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:A) Understanding & establishing co-creation  Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionMany energy efficiency measures for buildings influence air quality. Indoor air quality is impacted by several factors however, and is not just a direct measurement of outdoor air quality and building quality. Mold, allergens, bacteria, radon, asbestos and carbon monoxide are also all factors which influence it. Whilst home sealing can mean less external air pollution enters, it also reduces ventilation which reduces opportunities for pollutants to escape (Supertech, 2021).Figure from Supertech, 2021. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkDelete as appropriate:NationalCityNeighborhood Project AreaStreetHouseholdObjectData source and input type Connection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionRequired Data Expected Outputs Calculation methods Level of expertise required Links and referencesBuilding Energy Efficiency Measures | Indoor Air Quality (lbl.gov)Indoor air quality in highly energy efficient homes - a review (umanitoba.ca)Supertech, 2021. How to Measure Indoor Air Pollution | SuperTech | Indoor Air Quality (supertechhvac.com)
2.1.2 Connectivity of green spaceSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:A) Understanding & establishing co-creation  Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionMeasuring the potential for green or blue areas to amplify the connectivity and multifunctionality of other urban green areas.One of the major impacts of urbanization is the fragmentation of open spaces into smaller and more isolated patches. Increased fragmentation of green in urbanized areas can reduce intra- and inter-species connectivity and lead to a loss of biodiversity (Kettunen et al., 2007). Fragmentation of green areas and distance between habitat patches is thus an important factor in determining biodiversity. A Green Infrastructure approach, linking parks and other green spaces, is therefore considered essential for the preservation of biodiversity and to counter further habitat fragmentation and increase connectivity (Sylwester, 2009). Connectivity of landscapes can be evaluated in terms of:Structural connectivity – relating to the spatial configuration of patches, without considering the movement of individual organisms among these patches (Ioja et al. 2014) andFunctional connectivity – relating to the ability of organisms to move among patches (Tischendorf and Fahrig 2000). The index CIi can be calculated by measuring edge-to-edge distances between study site (separately for large and small study sites) and all other habitat patches within the 2-km radius of each landscape.Indicators of Green Infrastructure sub-criterion will assess the landscape connectivity and the mosaic diversity.Biodiversity is the measure of biological variety in the environment and it has an important role in functioning ecosystems services and health of environment and society. Biodiversity is an aspect of natural environment that is most directly affected by anthropogenic influence. City biodiversity is seen as an important aspect of sustainable and resilient urban development. The fragmentation of natural environments is a major threat to biodiversity as scattered and non-connected natural areas are much less efficient in preserving biodiversity than large and connected areas.This environmental (biological) indicator evaluates the increases of connectivity related to existing green infrastructures.The extent and spatial arrangement of accessible green space within each sub-demo area may have an important influence on public health and wellbeing; as well as having the potential to increase biodiversity. Vegetated areas provide cooling on hot days through evapotranspiration; and trees reduce radiant heat by shading, making public space and travelling routes more comfortable for people on days when temperatures in urban areas are high. This KPI will focus on public accessible greenspace, therefore residential gardens will not be considered hereBoth types of connectivity can be quantified using metrics that span different ranges of scale and complexity.Evaluation of blue-green space structural and functional connectivity can be used to:Underpin green infrastructure and biodiversity spatial planning;Prioritise sites for interventions;Assess that impacts of NBS projects on pre-existing green networks;Promote active transport initiatives.(Source: N4C CGS - Connectivity of Green Spaces)Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityNeighborhood  Data source and input typeSatellite/ mapCorine Land CoverNational databases (ex. Urban Atlas (only for big cities) ; OSGE in France…) ; BD TOPOLocal spatial databases / green cadastreEarth observation/Remote sensing methods: Remotely sensed data are inherently suited to provide information on urban vegetation and land cover characteristics, and their change at various geographical scales. However, the higher resolution required, the more expensive would be the RS data needed. In some cases, it would be better to use images provided by drones, but in this case permissions for survey mapping will be required and depends on the local and national/government regulations.Connection with SDGsGoal 3: Good health and well-beingGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 15: Life on landRequired Data Structural connectivityLand use maps e.g. CORINE (CORINE Land Cover — Copernicus Land Monitoring Service)Data on zones in the natural or naturalized conditions in the urban area of interest from, e.g., government agencies, municipalities, nature groups, universities, etc.polygon area of green spaceDistance to other green spacesFunctional connectivityDistance between study site and other habitat patches within a 2km radius.Expected Outputs Structural connectivityAnnual measurementsConnectivity from 1 (very low) to 5 (very high)QuantitativeMapFunctional connectivityha of potential habitatCalculation methods Structural connectivityTo estimate fragmentation, natural areas are defined and then estimation is made about their connections. A mesh indicator value is calculated. Natural areas are categorized into separate interconnected patches. The area of each patch is summed, squared and these squares are summed and divided by the total area of natural areas.This index (in hectares) is a metric - mesh indicator - used in the indicator value.Typology map data representing areas of GI both before and after NBS GI interventions will be analysed using a Geographic Information System (GIS) to calculate change in each sub-demo area ina) the proportion of the sub demo area represented by GI,b) distance between areas of GI, andc) the number of street treesUse of GIS to calculate % change in the following parameters in each sub-demo area following NBS GI interventions:The extent of accessible GI. Calculate the proportion of the sub-demo area occupied by GI (select all GI types in typology layer except residential gardens) pre- and post- GI interventions.The distance between each accessible GI patch and its nearest accessible GI neighbour within the sub-demo area. If d is the nearest-neighbour (Euclidean) distance from accessible GI patch i to accessible GI patch j; calculate the mean nearest neighbour distance over all patches, both pre- and post-intervention (FRAGSTATS, 2015)The distance to the nearest accessible green infrastructure everywhere (for every raster cell) calculated using a raster nearest neighbour approachthe number of street treesN4C CGS - Connectivity of Green SpacesGIS analysisFormula:Buffer (polygon i) = sqrt (Areapolygon i/π)Level of expertise requiredHighLinks and referencesEU handbook Structural connectivity of green spaceChan, L., Hillel, O., Elmqvist, T., Werner, P., Holman, N., Mader, A., & Calcaterra, E. (2014). User’s Manual on the Singapore Index on Cities’ Biodiversity (also known as the City Biodiversity Index). Singapore: National Parks Board, Singapore.
2.1.3 Green space managementSocial challenge/ impact linked to:Environmental Co-creation phase linked to:A) Understanding & establishing co-creation  Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionMeasure of the distribution of public greenspace (total surface or per capita) and categories (i.e., street trees, residential gardens, school green areas, parks) using more applied and participatory approaches as an index to increase quality/quantity of green/blue existing, restored and new NBS with a high degree of multifunctionality (informed by ES Valuation e.g., includes cultural ES value, needs of residents, socio-economics etc) and adapted to the type of urban area (e.g., size of urban area/landscape structure).Public greenspace in cities contributes to quality of life in terms of environmental services and social and psychological services. Public greenspace distribution can therefore be an important factor for making a city sustainable. Decisions on where to create greenspace/NBS should be based on criteria related to maximising the equitability of distribution, focusing on areas lacking greenspace and in areas where ES valuation identifies greatest benefit/need. Mears and Brindley (2019) provide a comprehensive review of metrics for assessing the equity of greenspace in urban areas. Within this process, they highlight the importance of generating comparable data across cities and projects, and the importance of incorporating the neighbourhood as experienced by residents as accurately as possible. Data on public greenspace distribution generated in these ways can be used to: Quantify the benefits of nature-based solution project in terms of improving the distribution of public greenspace; Support the planning of new nature-based solution greenspace initiatives;Underpin other indicators that require an understanding of greenspace distribution as a foundation. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighbourhoodData source and input typeSatellite imageryCensusConnection with SDGs Goal 3: Good health and well-beingGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesRequired DataLand use data derived from satellite imageryBasic population statistics by area Expected Outputsit can be used as a baseline to compare with 2.2.3 Changes to the size and distribution of public green space (However, the difference might not that significant)or it can be used to diagnose or identify the project area compared to other neighbourhoods within the cityin this case, we need to have population/green spaces data at the neighbourhood level over all neighbourhoods in city (source: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275965917_Urban_green_space_distribution_and_accessibility_in_Berlin_Germany)Calculation methodsA variety of methods exist from applied/public participation techniques through to earth observation/remote sensing approaches.Mapping green spaces with GIS: Whilst it is possible to physically map green spaces across cities, this tends to be a laborious and expensive process. As such, typically, public greenspace distribution would be measured through a mapping exercise that interrogates aerial photography and/or satellite imagery in a GIS environment (e.g. QuickBird satellite imageries analyses).Combining with census data: This can be combined with census data to determine demographics in relation to population distribution (de la Barrera et al. 2016). Such methods provide very basic insight into the distribution of green space in relation to population patterns. Supplementing these with methods to categorise urban greenspace (e.g. differentiating street trees, residential gardens, school green areas, parks, etc) and including variables that cover socio-economic, geographic and administrative aspects can provide greater evidence for supporting equality in urban greenspace distribution.Optional- Participatory mapping: Participatory approaches provide an opportunity for generating such data and/or ground-truthing the results from remote sensing data analyses. This includes the use of public participation GIS to map greenspaces overlooked by automated methods, and the use of public knowledge to categorise landuse types (Rall et al. 2019).  Level of expertise requiredExpertise in relation to mapping and modelling will be necessary. Also expertise in leading participatory processes would be of value to maximise the quality of outputs. Some map datasets and satellite imagery are freely available online, but higher resolution images and more comprehensive data needed for network-based measures potentially can involve licence fees/higher costs. Costs for GIS specialists if not available in-house. Participatory GIS can also involve costs in relation to designing a portal, hosting the webpage, generating engagement, and analysing data. Links and referencesApplied Methods:de la Barrera, F., Reyes-Paecke, S. and Banzhaf, E. (2016) Indicators for green spaces in contrasting urban settings. Ecological Indicators 62, 212-219.Mears, M and Brindley, P (2019) Measuring Urban Greenspace Distribution Equity: The Importance of Appropriate Methodological Approaches. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Informatics 8, 286.Rall, E, Hansen, R and Pauleit, S (2019) The added value of public participation GIS (PPGIS) for urban green infrastructure planning. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 40, 264-274.EO/RS methods:Atiqul Haq SM. (2011) Urban green spaces and an integrative approach to sustainable environment. Journal of Environmental Protection.;2:601–608. 10.4236/jep.2011.25069Badiu, D.L., Ioj?, C.I., P?troescu, M., Breuste, J., Artmann, M., Ni??, M.R., Gr?dinaru, S.R., Hossu, C.A. and Onose, D.A. (2016) Is urban green space per capita a valuable target to achieve cities’ sustainability goals? Romania as a case study. Ecological indicators, 70: 53-66.Comber, A., Brunsdon, C., & Green, E. (2008) Using a GIS-based network analysis to determine urban green space accessibility for different ethnic and religious groups. Landscape and Urban Planning, 86(1): 103–114.Daniels B, Zaunbrecher BS, Paas B et al. (29018) Assessment of urban green space structures and their quality from a multidimensional perspective. Science of the Total Environment 615 (2018) 1364–1378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.167Davies, Z.G., Edmondson, J.L., Heinemeyer, A., Leake, J.R. and Gaston, K.J. (2011) Mapping an urban ecosystem service: quantifying above?ground carbon storage at a city?wide scale. Journal of applied ecology, 48(5): 1125-1134.de la Barrera, F., Reyes-Paecke, S. and Banzhaf, E. (2016) Indicators for green spaces in contrasting urban settings. Ecological Indicators, 62: 212-219Foster A, Dunham IM. (2015) Volunteered geographic information, urban forests, and environmental justice. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems.; 53:65–75. 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2014.08.001Joseph, M., Wang, L. & Wang, F.H. (2012) Using Landsat Imagery and Census Data for Urban Population Density Modeling in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. GI Science & Remote Sensing, 49:2, 228-250.Le Texier M, Schiel K, Caruso J (2018) The provision of urban green space and its accessibility: Spatial data effects in Brussels. PLoS One 13(10): e0204684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204684Mitchell R, Astell-Burt T, Richardson EA. (2011) A comparison of green space indicators for epidemiological research. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health.;54(10):853–858 10.1136/jech.2010.119172Nicholls S. Measuring the accessibility and equity of public parks: a case study using GIS. Managing Leisure. 2001;6(4):201–219. 10.1080/13606710110084651Oh, K. and Jeong, S., 2007. Assessing the spatial distribution of urban parks using GIS. Landscape and urban planning, 82(1- 2): 25-32.Ren Z., He X., Zheng H., Zhang D., Yu X., Shen G., Guo R. Estimation of the Relationship between Urban Park Characteristics and Park Cool Island Intensity by Remote Sensing Data and Field Measurement. Forests. 2013;4:868– 886. doi: 10.3390/f4040868.Santos T, Tenedório JA, Gonçalves JA (2016) Quantifying the City’s Green Area Potential Gain Using Remote Sensing Data. Sustainability 2016, 8, 1247; doi:10.3390/su8121247Seiferling I, Naik N, Ratti C, Proulx R. (2017) Quantifying and mapping urban trees with street-level imagery and computer vision. Landscape and Urban Planning.;165:93–101Taylor BT, Fernando P, Bauman AE, Williamson A, Craig JC, Redman S. (2011) Measuring the quality of public open space using Google Earth. American Journal of Preventive Medicine.;40(2):105–112. 10.1016/j.amepre.2010.10.024Sister C, Wolch J, Wilson J. Got green? Addressing environmental justice in park provision. GeoJournal. 2010;75:229–248. 10.1007/s10708-009-9303-8Van De Voorde T. (2016) Spatially explicit urban green indicators for characterizing vegetation cover and public green space proximity: a case study on Brussels, Belgium. International Journal of Digital Earth.;10(8):798–813. 10.1080/17538947.2016.1252434Van Herzele A, Wiedemann T. A monitoring tool for the provision of accessible and attractive urban green spaces. Landscape and Urban Planning. 2003;63:109–126. 10.1016/S0169- 2046(02)00192-5
Data cluster 2.2. Urban environmental dynamic indicators and metrics2.2.1 Existing NBSSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:B) Define & co-designing   Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityData source and input typeManual input by municipality and city technical partnersConnection with SDGs Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionGoal 15: Life on landRequired DataTotal area of greenspace (it can drown from 2.1.3)Tree cover (ha)Total area of green roofs including: area of intensive green roofsarea of semi-intensive green roofsarea of extensive green roofsNumber of households within 300m and 1200m (of existing NBS)Number of businesses within 300m and 1200m (of existing NBS)Number of residents within 300m and 1200m (of existing NBS)Percentage evergreenLeaf-on date (average last frost date)Leaf-off date (average first frost date)Factor to account for night-timeFactor to account for periods of precipitationExpected OutputsCO2 absorption capacity of current NBS in city districtCalculation methodsPlease use GI Val calculators (https://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/)Level of expertise required Links and referenceshttps://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/
2.2.2 Prototypes tested in city districtsSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:C) Materialising & co-implementingLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityData source and input typeData collected manually by the project personnel.Connection with SDGs Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionGoal 15: Life on landRequired Data New green space created by the prototypesPre-existing area of greenspace enhanced by the prototypesNumber of households within 300m, 1200m and 450m (of the prototypes)Number of businesses within 300m and 1200m (of the prototypes)Number of residents within 300m and 1200m (of the prototypes)Other beneficiariesTree cover after the prototypesTotal area of green roofs after the prototypes including: area of intensive green roofsarea of semi-intensive green roofsarea of extensive green roofsPercentage evergreen (new planting)Expected OutputsCO2 absorption capacity of NBS prototypes in city districtCalculation methodsPlease use GI Val calculators (https://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/)Level of expertise required Links and referenceshttps://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/ 
2.2.3 Changes to the size and distribution of public green space due to the DivAirCity interventionsSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:D) Ensuring sustainability   Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThe newly created green space as a result of DivAirCity interventions, and its distribution in terms of the number of people who are near to it. Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityData source and input typeData collected manually by the project personnel.Connection with SDGs Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionGoal 15: Life on landRequired DataNew green space created by the DivAirCity interventionsPre-existing area of greenspace enhanced by the DivAirCity interventionsNumber of households within 300m, 1200m and 450m (of the DivAirCity interventions)Number of businesses within 300m and 1200m (of the DivAirCity interventions)Number of residents within 300m and 1200m (of the DivAirCity interventions)Other beneficiaries ?Tree cover after the prototypesTotal area of green roofs after the DivAirCity interventions including: area of intensive green roofsarea of semi-intensive green roofsarea of extensive green roofsratio evergreen to deciduous new trees (new planting)Expected Outputs Changes in terms of conversion of paved area to green areas in city district (after the interventions)Changes to the proportion of the population in the designated area not living within ten minutes walking from public green space (after the interventions)Calculation methodsPlease use GI Val calculators (https://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/)Level of expertise required Links and referenceshttps://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/
2.2.4 Land use change and green space configurationDescriptionRecords change in land use (e.g., from brownfield to green areas by adding vegetated brownfield to UGI resource) and accounting for configuration (e.g., individual gardens, groups of gardens and socio-economic factors impact on the utility of private gardens for native biodiversity conservation).Identifying urban land-use patterns is important for decision-makers to ensure sustainable development. Typical metrics for this indicator comprise the use of land use and land cover maps. These are typically obtained by classifying and modelling Remotely Sensed (RS) data, for example Landsat in a GIS environment. Use of remote sensing involves the application of multi temporal datasets to quantitatively analyse the temporal effects of the land use changes as well as green space configuration. Due to the high degree of complexity of urban issues, GIS and remote sensing (RS) technologies have long been used to facilitate scientists to assess the overall state of urban environment, to manage the urban infrastructures and improve the efficiency and rationality of its spatial management. A necessary prerequisite for the improvement of urban environment is rationality of its spatial management – the optimal division of urban spaces by their functional predestination. One of approaches suited to this is functional zonation of the city – a spatial management of basic types of activities – labour, household, recreational. Data on landuse change and greenspace configuration collected in these ways can be used to:Track landuse change on sites in relation to ecosystem service provision;Track trends in private garden use to monitor a substantial green infrastructure asset over which local authorities have little influence;Set targets for landuse change, for example recognising the highest quality brownfield sites for biodiversity and ecosystem service delivery and prioritising the beneficial reuse of brownfield sites with little environmental value.Even with advances in RS, the ability to distinguish various urban land use types accurately using classification algorithms remains difficult due to the fine-scale heterogeneity of land cover types in urban areas (Pauleit & Duhme, 2000; Jia et al., 2018). Methods that combine RS and more applied approaches have been developed to establish a greater level of precision in relation to this micro-variation. For instance, Pauleit & Duhme (2000) used a combination of existing habitat inventory, mapping land cover, and units and types from aerial photographs to reproduce the fine-grained patterns of land covers in the city of Munich. This enabled delineation of distinct units (e.g. configurations of built-up and open spaces such as detached houses, high-rise blocks, industrial areas, parks, agricultural lands etc.) which were grouped into 24 urban land cover types (e.g. houses, factory block, roads, railways, lakes and ponds, woodlands, parks and green spaces, cemeteries, sports fields, etc.). This enabled quantitative characterisation of physical features of units (% cover of sealed surfaces, vegetation, etc.) which was built into a GIS database. Environmental parameters (e.g. surface temperature, rainwater infiltration) were assigned to land covers to assess the likely environmental impacts of land cover changes, for instance rainwater infiltration. When considering land use change and greenspace configuration, it is important to consider how green (vegetated) urban brownfields can supplement urban green infrastructure by providing habitat, microclimate and recreational services (Mathey et al., 2015). Changes in their land use and physical structure as a result of urban planning decisions will impact ecosystem service provision. Development of brownfield sites can often have a negative impact on ecosystem service provision compared to their undeveloped state. As such, their consideration as a part of land use change indicators is not straightforward. Brownfield registers and Environmental Impact Assessments can provide source data regarding pre-development brownfield habitat structure/quality. Parameters for habitat services provided by green urban brownfields can be based on successional stage typologies: brownfield with pioneer vegetation; with persistent ruderal vegetation; with ruderal tall herbaceous vegetation; with spontaneous wood; and three biodiversity parameters: structural diversity, specific plant and animal groups, regenerative functions. This information can be supplemented by modelling of microclimate regulation based on vegetation parameters can be done at site level (ENVI-met) and city level (HIRVAC-2D). Data relating to perception, acceptance and use of/forms of use of brownfields by residents can be collected by questionnaires. Scenario analysis can show how changes in land use can impact ecosystem services (e.g modelling future development proposals). These aspects should be integrated into analytical and evaluation algorithms when devising city strategies for brownfields to secure ecosystem services. In terms of assessing the value of domestic gardens in relation to their ability to support biodiversity, several studies have developed methods for assessing/quantifying value. This includes methods for assessing value for urban birds (Daniels and Kirkpatrick 2006) and invertebrates (Smith et al. 2006). Goddard et al. (2010) present a comprehensive overview of a range of methods related to garden biodiversity. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkApplied methods:This indicator is generally applied at a city-scale, but neighbourhood and site level assessments can also be made.Earth observation/Remote sensing methods:methods suitable for a range of geographical scales depending on the resolution of the satellite imagery used (e.g. 250x250m for MODIS, 30x30m for Landsat or 10x10m for Sentinel-2).Data source [ link to data framework]Satellite-derived land use maps such as CORINE.Data needsRequired data will depend on selected methods, for further details see applied and earth observation/remote sensing metrics reviews in: Connecting Nature Indicator Metrics Reviews Env42_Applied and Env42_RSExpected OutputsPercentage changes of land cover typesMapsCalculation methodsGISLinks and referencesApplied methods:Daniels, G.D. and Kirkpatrick, J.B. (2006) Does variation in garden characteristics influence the conservation of birds in suburbia? Biological Conservation 133, 326–335.Goddard, MA, Dougill, AJ and Benton, TG (2010) Scaling up from gardens: biodiversity conservation in urban environments. TREE 1175 1–9.Jia, Y., Ge, Y., Ling, F., Guo, X., Wang, J., Wang, L., Chen, Y. and Li, X., 2018. Urban Land Use Mapping by Combining Remote Sensing Imagery and Mobile Phone Positioning Data. Remote Sensing, 10(3): 446.Mathey, J., Rößler, S., Banse, J., Lehmann, I. and Bräuer, A. (2015) Brownfields as an element of green infrastructure for implementing ecosystem services into urban areas. Journal of Urban Planning and Development, 141(3), A4015001.Pauleit, S. and Duhme, F. (2000) Assessing the environmental performance of land cover types for urban planning. Landscape and urban planning, 52(1), 1-20.Smith, RM, Gaston, KJ, Warren, P and Thompson, K (2006) Urban domestic gardens (VIII): Environmental correlates of invertebrate abundance. Biodiversity and Conservation, 15, 2515–2545.Earth observation/Remote sensing methods:Agarwal C., G. M. Green, J. M. Grove, T. P. Evans and C. M. Schweik (2002) A Review and Assessment of Land-Use Change Models: Dynamics of Space, Time, and Human Choice. Apollo the International Magazine of Art and Antiques, 1 (1).Fonji, S. F., & Taff, G. N. (2014). Using satellite data to monitor land-use land-cover change in North-eastern Latvia. SpringerPlus, 3, 61. doi:10.1186/2193-1801-3-61Hansen, M.C.; Loveland, T.R. A review of large area monitoring of land cover change using Landsat data. Remote Sens. Environ. 2012, 122, 66–74.Yang, X.; Lo, C.P. Using a time series of satellite imagery to detect land use and land cover changes in the Atlanta, Georgia metropolitan area. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2002, 23, 1775– 1798.Baumann, M.; Ozdogan, M.; Kuemmerle, T.; Wendland, K.J.; Esipova, E.; Radeloff, V.C. Using the Landsat record to detect forest-cover changes during and after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the temperate zone of European Russia. Remote Sens. Environ. 2012, 124, 174–184.Taubenböck, H.; Esch, T.; Felbier, A. Monitoring urbanization in mega cities from space. Remote Sens. Environ. 2012, 117, 162–176Vanonckelen, S.; Lhermitte, S.; van Rompaey, A. The effect of atmospheric and topographic correction methods on land cover classification accuracy. Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 2013, 24, 9–21.Data cluster 2.3. Urban environmental monitoring indicators2.3.1 Removal of atmospheric pollutants by vegetationDescriptionWith this KPI the main aim is to calculate the pollutions removed by vegetation (in stem, leaves and roots) (kg ha-1 year-1) using formulas and equations in order to assess the impact of the NBS.The air pollutant removal capacity of trees is estimated based on dry deposition that is considered as the rate of air pollutants removed from the atmosphere (Lovett, 1994; McPherson et al., 1998; Scott et al., 1998). Pollutants are removed on leaf surfaces primarily through leaf stomata uptake of gaseous pollutants and leaf interception of particulate matter (Nowak et al., 2006). The first process leads to the diffusion of pollutant into the inner part of leaves. Gases may also be absorbed or react with plant surfaces, whereas removal through the latter process may be reduced by the suspension of intercepted particles from the leaf surfaces through wind action (Selmi et al., 2016). Air pollutant deposition on vegetation cover other than trees (such as shrubs, grass) and land cover types (like water bodies, and buildings) are not included in the calculation presented herein.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkStreetHouseholdProject AreaData source [ link to data framework]monitoring stations(municipal) maps and models.Data needsAtmospheric pollutant concentration data (2.3.2 can be used)tree cover data (2.2.3 can be used) Expected OutputsAnnualCalculation methodsLinks and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D2.4 - Monitoring program to Valladolid. https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d2-4-- -monitoring-program-to-valladolid.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D3.4 - Monitoring program to Liverpool https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d3-4-- -monitoring-program-to-liverpool.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D4.4 – Monitoring program to Izmir https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d4-4-- monitoring-program-to-izmir.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D5.3: City Diagnosis and Monitoring Procedures https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d5-3- city-diagnosis-and-monitoring-procedures.klAir Pollution in the UK 2015. https://uk air.defra.gov.uk/library/annualreport/indexBottalico, F., Chirici, G., Giannetti, F., De Marco, A., Nocentini, S., Paoletti, E., Salbitano, F., Sanesi, G., Serenelli, C., Travaglini, D., 2016. Air pollution removal by green infrastructures and urban forests in the city of Florence. Agric. Agric. Sci. Procedia 8, 243–251. doi:10.1016/j.aaspro.2016.02.099.Mullaney, J., Lucke, T., Trueman, S.J., 2015. A review of benefits and challenges in growing street trees in paved urban environments. Landscape Urban Plan. 134, 157–166. doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.10.013.Baró, F., Haase, D., Gómez-Baggethun, E., Frantzeskaki, N., 2015. Mismatches between ecosystem services supply and demand in urban areas: A quantitative assessment in five European cities. Ecol. Indic. 55, 146–158. doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.03.013.SDG indicator 3.9.1 https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/files/Metadata-03- 09-01.pdfSDG indicator 11.6.2. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/files/Metadata-11- 06-02.pd
2.3.2 Concentration of particulate matterSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionIn 2005 the Common Air Quality Index (CAQI) was proposed to facilitate the comparison of air quality in European cities in real time. There are many air quality indices (AQI-s) in use in the world. All are different in concept and presentation and comparing air quality in cities was virtually impossible for the lay public1 . The CAQI and the accompanying website www.airqualitynow.eu or app were introduced as a ‘lingua franca’ solution to overcome this problem17 .Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighborhoodData source [ link to data framework]air quality monitoring stationsConnection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities* Goal 13: Climate actionRequired Data* Atmospheric Pollutant measurement data* A yearly monitoring is recommended, since some particles show a seasonal periodicity and shorter campaigns could not permit a proper quantification. For example, pollen particles, which can be encompassed in the PM1O size range, are abundant in spring and wildfires are mostly concentrated during summer.• The deposition rate of the particles (e.g., speed of their removal from the atmosphere) is proportional to their size, so the monitoring should be with higher spatial resolution as much as the size of the particles of interest increase.* Pollutant measurement dataExpected Outputs* Continuously monitored* numerical value (very low, low, medium, high and very high)* graphic map* quantitativeCalculation methods* Air pollution concentrations can be estimated based on measured and/or modelled concentrations in ambient air (O3, NOx, VOC, PM10 and PM2.5) near the NBS intervention area. Data can be retrieved from air quality monitoring stations or from measured values during experimental campaigns. Data can also be estimated by applying air quality models, such as the WRF-Chem model (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [NOAA], n.d.), which estimates 3D concentration fields with an hourly resolution at the grid, neighbourhood or city scale.* Particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5) concentration: Particulate matter is measured using an air sampler that draws ambient air at a constant flow rate through a specially shaped inlet onto a filter that is weighed periodically to measure the accumulated particle load. The inlet defines the particle size cut-off (2.5 or 10 µm). A stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of particulate matter using standardized air sampler equipment is undertaken. Daily averages are averaged over a year to reach a yearly average, which acts as the indicator (ISO, 2018).* Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) concentration: To quantify nitrogen dioxide, a stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of nitrogen dioxide using standardized equipment is undertaken. An average of hourly averages is used to calculate a daily average and daily averages to calculate a yearly average, which acts as the indicator (ISO, 2018).* Ground-level ozone (O3) concentration: A stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of ozone using standardized equipment is undertaken. The convention for ozone measurement is to calculate a daily maximum 8-hour mean, which acts as the indicator (ISO, 2018).Level of expertise requiredHigh Links and referencesCosta, S., Ferreira, J., Silveira, C., Costa, C., Lopes, D., Relvas, H., … Teixeira, J.P. (2014). Integrating Health on Air Quality Assessment - Review Report on Health Risks of Two Major European Outdoor Air Pollutants: PM and NO2. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health - Part B Critical Reviews, 17(6), 307-340.European Environment Agency. (2018b). Air quality in Europe – 2018 report. EEA Report No. 12/2018. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. Retrieved from https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/air-quality-in europe-2018Health Effects Institute (HEI). (2018). State of Global Air 2018. Special Report. Boston, MA: Health Effects Institute.International Organization for Standardization (ISO). (2018). Sustainable cities and communities — Indicators for city services and quality of life (ISO 37120:2018). Available from https://www.iso.org/standard/68498.htmlMiranda, A.I., Martins, H., Valente, J., Amorim, J.H., Borrego, C., Tavares, R., … Alonso, R. (2017). Case Studies: modeling the atmospheric benefits of urban greening, In D. Pearlmutter, C. Calfapietra, R. Samson, L. O'Brien,S. Ostoic, G. Sanesi, R. Alonso (Eds.), The Urban Forest. Cultivating Green Infrastructures for People and the Environment (pp. 89-99). New York: Springer International Publishing.National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). (n.d.). Weather Research and Forecasting model coupled to Chemistry (WRF-Chem). Retrieved from https://ruc.noaa.gov/wrf/wrf-chem/World Health Organization (WHO). (2016). Ambient air pollution: A global assessment of exposure and burden of disease. Geneva: World Health Organization. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/phe/publications/air-pollution-global assessment/en/
2.3.3 Concentration of particulate matter at respiration height along roadways and streetsDescriptionThe concentration of PM2.5 and PM10, respectively, per cubic metre of air (units µg m-3) at a measuring height of 1.5 m above the ground surface to represent the air quality experienced by bicyclists and pedestrians.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework StreetData source [ link to data framework]portable photometric samplerData needs* Atmospheric PM2.5 and PM10 concentration data (in µg m-3) obtained at respiration height using (a) portable monitoring device(s).* The different respiration height of participants of 6+1 needs to be considered.* The importance of estimating the air quality in the microenvironment (defined as the ensemble of places visited during the study) of a specific category cannot be underestimated, and it was already shown to be different from the average values measured by the fixed stations (Cunha-Lopes et al., 2019).Expected Outputseach pre determined sampling location at a study site should be repeat sampled every 4 weeks for one year pre intervention, and for at least two years following intervention.Calculation methodsMeasure air concentrations of PM2.5 and PM10 at defined sampling points at a height of 1.5 m above ground level and a range of linear distances from NBS street tree/green wall locations, both pre- and post-intervention. Compare these data to measurements taken at analogous locations on equivalent stretches of road without street-side NBS at similar times of day on the same dates.A portable photometric sampler designed to measure ambient PM2.5 and PM10 concentrations can be used to gather data on a non-continuous basis, i.e., during planned field monitoring campaigns. Data can be collected and stored on the device, then can be downloaded later to a PC. Compare the particulate matter (PM2.5 and PM10) values qualitatively and quantitatively for the periods before and after the interventions in the NBS and reference sections. Quantitatively assess using the following expression:PM impact can be calculated both for PM2,5 and PM10. Positive or null PM impact values indicates negative or no impact of the NBS on PM concentration for that implementation. Negative values indicates a positive impact of that NBS on PM concentration.Links and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D2.4 - Monitoring program to Valladolid. https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d2-4--- monitoring-program-to-valladolid.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D3.4 - Monitoring program to Liverpool https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d3-4--- monitoring-program-to-liverpool.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D4.4 – Monitoring program to Izmir https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d4-4-- monitoring-program-to-izmir.klURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D5.3: City Diagnosis and Monitoring Procedures https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d5-3- city-diagnosis-and-monitoring-procedures.klAir Pollution in the UK 2015. https://uk air.defra.gov.uk/library/annualreport/indexBottalico, F., Chirici, G., Giannetti, F., De Marco, A., Nocentini, S., Paoletti, E., Salbitano, F., Sanesi, G., Serenelli, C., Travaglini, D., 2016. Air pollution removal by green infrastructures and urban forests in the city of Florence. Agric. Agric. Sci. Procedia 8, 243–251. doi:10.1016/j.aaspro.2016.02.099.Mullaney, J., Lucke, T., Trueman, S.J., 2015. A review of benefits and challenges in growing street trees in paved urban environments. Landscape Urban Plan. 134, 157–166. doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.10.013.Baró, F., Haase, D., Gómez-Baggethun, E., Frantzeskaki, N., 2015. Mismatches between ecosystem services supply and demand in urban areas: A quantitative assessment in five European cities. Ecol. Indic. 55, 146–158. doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.03.013.
2.3.4 Avoided emission through building energy efficiency improvement and renewable integrationSocial challenge/ impact linked to:Environmental Co-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionClimate change causes a number of environmental mechanisms that affect both the endpoint human health and ecosystem health. Climate change models are in general developed to assess the future environmental impact of different policy scenarios. Greenhouse gases emission indicators encompass a variety of measurements on the emission and concentration of Greenhouse gases. Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the Earth‘s surface, the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. This indicator measures the emissions of the six main GHGs which have a direct impact on climate change.This indicator aim to quantify the amount of greenhouse gases (GHG) avoided as a result of implementation of NBS at the building scale. GHG emissions through NBS can be avoided through reduced consumption of heating and cooling energy demands at building scale for instance.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkProject areaData source [ link to data framework] Data needs to be collected manually by the project personnel.Data Needs• the energy use data is provided in kWh/m2/year* A net additional area of green infrastructure* % building(s) energy consumption, disaggregated by uses* Yearly energy useExpected Outputs• * QuantitativeCalculation methods* Calculation will use the existing tool, GI-Val (https://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/)* The data collection and calculation need to be conducted before (baseline) and after the interventionLinks and referencesGoedkoop, M., Heijungs, R., Huijbergts, M., Schryver, A.D., Struijs, J., van Zelm, R., 2009. ReCiPe 2008 A life cycle impact assessment method which comprises harmonised category indicators at the midpoint and the endpoint level First edition Report I: Characterisation. URL: https://www.leidenuniv.nl/cml/ssp/publications/recipe_char acterisation.pdf Date of access: November 2017.Gerdes, H., Bassi, S., Portale, E., Mazza, L., Srebotnjak, T., Porch, L., 2011. In Stream, D2.2 Final Report: Evaluation of Indicators for EU Policy Objectives. URL: https://www.ecologic.eu/sites/files/publication/2016/1901- final-report-d2-2-evaluation-of-indicators-for-eu-policy objectives.pdf Date of access: November 2017.https://ghgprotocol.org/calculation-toolshttps://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/
2.3.5 BiodiversitySocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionThe Shannon Diversity is a very common index used in ecology to quantify diversity in a community. The index provides more information about the fauna and flora composition than simply area richness. It takes into consideration both the number of different species observed and their relative abundancesScale as linked to D2.2 framework CityNeighborhood Project AreaData source and input typeManual collection by project partners who have taxonomy knowledge Connection with SDGs Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionGoal 15: Life on landRequired DataNumber of individuals for each species recordedExpected OutputsShannon Diversity indicatorCalculation methodsShannon Diversity Index it is calculated as follows:Pi is the proportion of total number of individuals of ith species, divided by total number of individuals of all species recorded.Shannon Diversity Index needs semiquantitative data. In our case, data must be collected through linear transects (linear paths with fixed length), in which experts record number of specimens for each speciesButterflies survey: at least once a month from April to SeptemberBees survey: at least once a month from April to SeptemberPlants survey: at least once a month from April to SeptemberLevel of expertise requiredShannon Diversity Index is easy to apply but data collection requires a high level of taxonomic knowledge, in order to recognise the correct species, for each target taxon.Links and referenceshttps://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php/Glossary:Shannon_evenness_index_(SEI)https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php?title=File:Shannon_Diversity_Index_and_Shannon_Evenness_Index,_2009.PNGMårtensson, R. (2016). Species and Biological Diversity-Choices of DiversityIndices and their Potential Consequences for Nature Conservation
2.3.6 Carbon sequestration in vegetationDescriptionTotal carbon removed or stored.Accounting for C stored in vegetation in an urban area can indicate the condition of natural green spaces, total free surface area and total quantity of vegetation in the area examined. Measures of C storage and sequestration also provide a tangible connection to climate change mitigation, and the impacts of local land use, planning and management decision-making. It is important to note the substantial variation in C sequestration and storage capacity of different types of NBSScale as linked to D2.2 frameworkProject areaData source [ link to data framework]CORINE landcover information or similar local dataset (2.2.4) Data needsIn DivAirCity the CO2 absorption is associated to the NBS intervention involving increasing urban vegetation. This can be either trees, bushes planted in specific area of the city or also as green roofs. The CO2 absorption capacity of a plant depends on the biomass increase in a certain temporal range. The increase in plant biomass depends on intrinsic characteristics of the plants that determine the specific growth rate, such us the photosynthesis rate and the plant form and architecture. The CO2 absorbed by a plant is calculated starting from the plant fresh weight taking into consideration the percentage of water, the proportion between above and below ground biomass and the Carbon content of plants. To allow these evaluations, the following data are needed:* For trees, at least trunk diameter at breast height and tree height* For bushes and other type of vegetation, the canopy volume* Expected CO2 sequestration potential of each new species planted at maturity* Expected time taken for each new species to reach maturity When the Carbon absorbed value is obtained for one plant, to upscale to the whole NBS intervention area, data about the total amount of plants should be considered. This can be evaluated according to the type of interventions as:* New green space (m2) after interventions* Tree cover after interventions * Ratio evergreen to deciduous of trees used for the interventions * Total area of green roofs after the intervention including: * area of intensive green roofs* area of semi-intensive green roofs * area of extensive green roofsTo be able to measure the difference in CO2 absorbed by vegetation following the NBS intervention, the CO2 absorbed by the vegetation before and after the intervention is needed. * Pre-existing area of greenspace enhanced by the DivAirCity intervention * Ratio of evergreen to deciduous new trees before intervention * Ratio of evergreen to deciduous new trees after intervention * Mean canopy cover percentage for all forested pixels in the region * Mean canopy cover percentage for all non-forest pixels in region * Area sum of all non-forest pixels in regionThe potential CO2 sequestration depends on the maturity time of the vegetation used in the intervention. When the future Carbon sequestration is envisaged, the use of models to forecast the growth rate (also in association to forecasted future climate change). For tree species, models such as Yield-safe, can be used to perform this kind of projections. Expected OutputsMeasured as per unit area per unit time tonnes/ha/y or similar unitAnnual data collectionCalculation methodsTo evaluate C removal or storage per unit area per unit time:Divide each C storage value obtained by the area assessed to determine C storage per unit areaSubtract the earlier value obtained for C storage and sequestration/unit area from the more recent value, then divide by the length of time between measures to obtain an estimate of C removal or storage per unit area per unit time.The growth rate of a forest has significant impact on its C storage potential. Forest C sequestration (FCS) is usually estimated as a function of forest area, forest type, and forest age:Links and referencesSmith, J.E., Heath, L.S., Skog, K.E., & Birdsey, R.A. (2006). Methods for Calculating Forest Ecosystem and Harvested Carbon with Standard Estimates for Forest Types of the United States. USDA Forest Service Report GTR-NE-343. Newtown Square, PA: Northeastern Research Station, United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.Zheng, D., Ducey, M.J. & Heath, L.S. (2013). Assessing net carbon sequestration on urban and community forests of northern New England, USA. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 12, 61- 68.Zheng, D., Heath, L.S., Ducey, M.J. & Smith, J.E. (2011). Carbon changes in conterminous US forests associated with growth and major disturbances: 1992–2001. Environmental Research Letters, 6, 014012.
2.3.7 Common Air Quality IndexSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionIn 2005 the Common Air Quality Index (CAQI) was proposed to facilitate the comparison of air quality in European cities in real time. There are many air quality indices (AQI-s) in use in the world. All are different in concept and presentation and comparing air quality in cities was virtually impossible for the lay public1 . The CAQI and the accompanying website www.airqualitynow.eu or app were introduced as a ‘lingua franca’ solution to overcome this problem17 .Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* CityData source [ link to data framework]* Air pollution monitorConnection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities* Goal 13: Climate actionRequired Data* Hourly, daily, yearly values (absolute and average) NO2, PM10 and O3 (additionally CO, SO2, PM2,5)* The European air quality index CAQI does not prescribe a spatial resolution for this quantification, but it distinguishes between “background” and “roadside” monitoring sites, characterized by different mandatory measurements (NO2 and PM10 are always mandatory, O3 only in the first instance).* The European air quality index CAQI has both hourly and daily versions, characterized by different pollutants’ thresholds (always higher for the hourly measurements) for the air quality levels.Expected Outputs* Continuously monitored* numerical value (very low, low, medium, high and very high)* graphic map* quantitativeCalculation methodsCAQI methodology.Level of expertise requiredHigh Links and referenceswww.airqualitynow.euElshout S van den, Léger K, Nussio F. Comparing urban air quality in Europe in real time, a review of existing air quality indices and the proposal of a common alternative. Environ Int 2008; 34(5):720–6.Elshout S van den. CITEAIR II project. INTERREG IVC Programme. www.airqualitynow.eu/download/CITEAIR Comparing_Urban_Air_Quality_across_Borders.pdf, 2012. [Accessed oct-2017]. 
2.3.8 Normalised Difference Vegetation indexSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescriptionThere are many vegetation indices which can be calculated based only on a satellite image, all of which vary in their resolution and accuracy as they are calculated using different electromagnetic bands. Of these, the NDVI is the most commonly used and can be widely regarded as a measure of the health of vegetation. The chlorophyll present in plants strongly absorbs visible light and the cellular structure strongly reflects light in the near-infrared. It has been found to saturate at high biomasses (for example when calculated over forested land), but is highly effective for delineating the presence of greenery in urban environments. It produces a score between -1 and 1, a higher score corresponds to a greener environment. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkScale is dependent on the resolution of the satellite imagery used. Most ubiquitous satellites include MODIS (250m x 250m resolution), the Landsat series (30 x 30 m) and Sentinel-2 (10 x 10 m but only launched in 2015 so long time series are not available). NationalCityNeighborhood Project AreaData source and input typeSatellite image repositoryfor example Copernicus Open Access (Sentinel-2) hub: https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/or NASA Earth Explorer EarthExplorer (usgs.gov) (Landsat 1-9 and MODIS terra and aqua)Connection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionGoal 15: Life on landRequired DataSatellite image which is largely cloud-free or cloud-masked, of an appropriate resolution (for example from freely available satellite image repositories from Sentinel-2 (10x10m resolution) or Landsat (30x30m resolution)). Expected OutputsA value between -1.0 and 1.0The lower the value the poorer health the land is in.This can also be displayed as an image based on the satellite image from which the index has been calculated. Calculation methodsThere are many simple tools in GIS software which are able to automatically calculate the NDVI based on a satellite image, provided the image does not contain too many clouds and cloud shadows which impact the result. ArcGIS is one software example which has an NDVI tool. It can also be done manually, for example using Google Earth Engine, using the following formula: Level of expertise requiredMedium - basic GIS skills required, and ability to process satellite images. Links and referencesNDVI: Normalized Difference Vegetation Index For Agriculture (eos.com)
2.3.9 Number of days in which air quality parameters exceed threshold valuesSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionNumber of documented exceedances to the limit value established in the Air Quality Framework Directive (Directive 2008/50/EC) for PM2.5, PM10, NO2, SO2, CO, ground-level O3 and PAHs (as indicated by benzo[a]pyrene).Air pollution is considered the single largest environmental health risk in the world, causing an estimated 2-6 million or more yearly deaths globally (Health Effects Institute [HEI], 2018; World Health Organisation [WHO], 2016). An important focus of research has been on the role of urban vegetation in the formation and removal of air pollutants in cities (e.g., Miranda et al., 2017) and the associated impacts of air pollution on morbidity, mortality and life expectancy (e.g., Costa et al., 2014). The most relevant air pollutants are a particulate matter of different sizes (PM2.5, PM10), ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulphur dioxide (SO2), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), carbon monoxide (CO), benzene (C6H6) and toxic metals (As, Cd, Ni, Pb and Hg) (EEA, 2018b).Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* City* Neighborhood Data source and input type* Sensor measurement Connection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities* Goal 13: Climate actionData needs* Calculation from CAQI* Pollutant measurement data from municipalities and regional, national and European authorities:* Particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5) concentration* Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) concentration* Ground-level ozone (O3) concentration* Carbon monoxide (CO) concentration* Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) concentrationExpected Outputs* Continuous measurements of PM2.5, PM10, NO2, SO2, CO, ground-level O3 and PAHs with hourly, daily, monthly, and yearly averages.Calculation methods* Air pollution concentrations for regulatory compliance are based on measured pollutant concentrations (PM10 and PM2.5, O3, NO2, SO2, CO and PAHs) in ambient air. * Particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5) concentration: The reference method for the sampling and measurement of PM2.5 and PM10 is described in EN12341:2014 “Ambient Air — standard gravimetric measurement method for the determination of the PM10 or PM2,5 mass concentration of suspended particulate matter”. Briefly, particulate matter is measured using an air sampler that draws ambient air at a constant flow rate through a specially shaped inlet onto a filter that is weighed periodically to measure the accumulated particle load. The inlet defines the particle size cut-off (2.5 or 10 µm). A stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of particulate matter using standardized air sampler equipment is undertaken. The limit concentration for PM2.5 is 25 µg/m3 averaged over one calendar year. Similarly, the limit concentration for PM10 is 40 µg/m3 averaged over one year. To obtain these values, daily PM2.5 and PM10 averages are averaged over a year to reach a yearly average, which acts as the indicator (ISO, 2018). There is an additional daily average limit value for PM10 of 50 µg/m3, which cannot be exceeded more than 35 times in a calendar year.* Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) concentration: The reference method for the measurement of nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen is that described in EN 14211:2012 “Ambient air — Standard method for the measurement of the concentration of nitrogen dioxide and nitrogen monoxide by chemiluminescence”. To quantify nitrogen dioxide, a stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of nitrogen dioxide is undertaken using standardized chemiluminescence detection equipment. An average of hourly averages is used to calculate a daily average. Daily averages are then used to calculate a yearly average (ISO, 2018). The limit concentration for NO2 is 200 µg/m3 in any one-hour time period, and 40 µg/m3 averaged over one year.* Ground-level ozone (O3) concentration: The reference method for the measurement of ozone is described in EN 14625:2012 “Ambient air — Standard method for the measurement of the concentration of ozone by ultraviolet photometry”. A stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of ozone by ultraviolet photometry using standardized equipment is undertaken. The convention for ozone measurement is to calculate a daily maximum 8-hour mean (ISO, 2018). The limit concentration for maximum daily 8-hour mean ground-level O3 is 120 µg/m3.* Carbon monoxide (CO) concentration: The reference method for the measurement of carbon monoxide is described in EN 14626:2012 “Ambient air — Standard method for the measurement of the concentration of carbon monoxide by non dispersive infrared spectroscopy”. A stationary measuring station is placed in a representative traffic, urban, industrial or rural location and continuous measurement of CO using non-dispersive infrared spectroscopy equipment is undertaken. Like O3, the convention for CO measurement is to calculate a daily maximum 8-hour mean (ISO, 2018). The limit concentration for maximum daily 8-hour mean CO is 10 µg/m3.* Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) concentration: The reference method for the sampling of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in ambient air is described in EN 12341:2014. The PAH benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) serves as an analogue for all PAHs in the European air quality regulations. To assess the contribution of BaP in ambient air, the Ambient Air Quality Directive (2004/107/EC) outlines an obligation for Member States to monitor other relevant PAHs at a limited number of measurement sites including at least: benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(j)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, and dibenz(a,h)anthracene. The reference method for the measurement of benzo(a)pyrene in ambient air is described in EN 15549:2008 “Air quality — Standard method for the measurement of concentration of benzo[a]pyrene in ambient air”. Briefly, benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) is analysed as part of the captured PM10 matter. BaP samples are extracted from captured PM10 then analysed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with fluorescence detection (FLD) or by gas chromatography with mass spectrometric detection (GC/MS). The target value for BaP is 1 ng/m3 averaged over one calendar year.* Summary list of ambient air quality pollutants and limit concentrations.* Level of expertise required* High Links and references* Directive 2015/1480 of 28 August 2015 amending several annexes to Directives 2004/107/EC and 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the rules concerning reference methods, data validation and location of sampling points for the assessment of ambient air quality* Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe* Directive 2004/107/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 relating to arsenic, cadmium, mercury, nickel and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in ambient air* Costa, S., Ferreira, J., Silveira, C., Costa, C., Lopes, D., Relvas, H., … Teixeira, J.P. (2014). Integrating Health on Air Quality Assessment - Review Report on Health Risks of Two Major European Outdoor Air Pollutants: PM and NO2. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health - Part B Critical Reviews, 17(6), 307-340.* European Environment Agency. (2018b). Air quality in Europe – 2018 report. EEA Report No. 12/2018. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/ air quality-in-europe-2018* Health Effects Institute (HEI). (2018). State of Global Air 2018. Special Report. Boston, MA: Health Effects Institute.* International Organization for Standardization (ISO). (2018). Sustainable cities and communities — Indicators for city services and quality of life (ISO 37120:2018). https://www.iso.org/standard/68498.html* Miranda, A.I., Martins, H., Valente, J., Amorim, J.H., Borrego, C., Tavares, R., … Alonso, R. (2017). Case Studies: modeling the atmospheric benefits of urban greening, In D. Pearlmutter, C. Calfapietra, R. Samson, L. O'Brien,S. Ostoic, G. Sanesi, R. Alonso (Eds.), The Urban Forest. Cultivating Green Infrastructures for People and the Environment (pp. 89-99). New York: Springer International Publishing.* National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). (n.d.). Weather Research and Forecasting model coupled to Chemistry (WRF-Chem). Retrieved from https://ruc.noaa.gov/wrf/wrf-chem/* World Health Organization (WHO). (2016). Ambient air pollution: A global assessment of exposure and burden of disease. Geneva: World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/phe/publications/air-pollution global-assessment/en/
2.3.10 Proportion of population exposed to ambient air pollution Social challenge/ impact linked to:Environmental Co-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionUrban population exposed to air pollutant concentrations above EU standards and WHO air quality guidelines The following units are used in this indicator:Concentration: micrograms (mg) of pollutant per cubic metre for PM2.5, PM10, O3, NO2 and SO2. Nanograms (ng) of pollutant per cubic metre for BaP.Urban population (POP): number of inhabitants in the 'core city' and, from 2016 on, 'greater city' of the Urban Audit cities represented by the urban stations taken into account in the calculations.Percentage of the urban population.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework* City* NeighborhoodData source and input type* Air quality monitorConnection with SDGs* Goal 3: Good health and well-being* Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities* Goal 13: Climate actionData needs* Air Quality e-Reporting (AQ e-Reporting) provided by European Commission (https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/DAT-3-en)* AirBase - The European air quality database provided by European Environment Agency (EEA) (https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/DAT-3-en)* Gisco - Urban Audit 2012 provided by Statistical Office of the European Union (Eurostat) (https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and maps/data/external/gisco-urban-audit)* CCity population provided by City Population (https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and maps/data/external/city-population)* Data regarding microclimatic impacts of NBS can be obtained by installation of specific sensors in close proximity to implemented NBSExpected Outputs* Scale of measurements:* At sampling points as indicated by the data resolution needed to quantify NBS impacts.* EEA data are provided at district to region scale.* Data regarding microclimatic impacts of NBS can be obtained by installation of specific sensors in close proximity to implemented NBS.Calculation methods* Urban population exposure:* Information on cities is obtained from the Urban Audit (UA) data (Eurostat, 2014c). The urban population considered is the total number of people represented by any of the urban monitoring stations in the 'core city' and, from 2016, the 'greater city' of the UA cities taking part in the calculations. Initially, stations in the EEA air-quality database are spatially joined with UA core and, from 2016, greater cities in a geographical information system in order to select those stations that fall within the boundaries of the cities included in the UA collection. The selected stations include station types classified as 'urban traffic', 'suburban traffic', 'urban background' and 'suburban background'.* According to a study for the European Commission by Entec UK Limited (EC, 2006), in Europe, on average, 5% of the city population lives closer than 100 m from major routes and is therefore potentially exposed to concentrations measured at traffic stations. The remaining 95% of the city population is assumed to be exposed to urban and suburban background concentrations. These percentages vary among jurisdictions.* To calculate the percentages of persons living closer than 100 m to major traffic routes, national data on the population living closer than 100 m from major roads can been taken from Appendix D (EC, 2006).* For PM10, PM2.5, O3, NO2 and SO2, only stations with at least 75% of valid data per calendar year are used. For BaP, the minimum data time coverage accepted is 14% (51 days), according to the data quality objectives related to indicative measurements in the Directive 2004/107/EU (EU, 2004).* For each year, each city in country (j), and every pollutant, the total number of urban or suburban traffic stations (nit) and the total number of urban or suburban background stations (nib) are obtained. A percentage (Ptj %) of the total population of the city (Popi) is proportionally assigned to each of the traffic stations and Pbj % of Popi is proportionally assigned to each of the background stations. Thus, every traffic station has an allocated population equal to ((Ptj / 100) * Popi / nit) and every background station has an allocated population equal to ((Pbj /100) *Popi / nib).* EU LIMIT AND TARGET VALUES* Fine particulate matter (PM2.5): The annual mean concentration is calculated for each of the selected stations fulfilling the valid data criteria. Depending on the mean concentration, each station (and its allocated population) is then classified uniquely in one of the two concentration classes (less than or equal to the target value (25 µg/m3), or greater than the target value). The percentage of the urban population allocated to these two concentration classes is calculated by dividing the population represented by the stations assigned to each concentration class by the sum of the population assigned to each station.* Coarse particulate matter (PM10): For each selected station that fulfils the valid data criteria, the 90.4 percentile (P90.4) of the daily mean concentration series is calculated. P90.4 represents, in a complete series of 365 elements, the 36th highest value. When P90.4 is less than or equal to 50 µg/m3, it indicates that the daily limit value (DLV) was not exceeded on more than 35 days. Depending on the value of P90.4, each station (and its allocated population) is then classified uniquely in one of the two concentration classes (P90.4 > 50 µg/m3, i.e., greater than the DLV and P90.4 ≤ 50 µg/m3, i.e., less than the DLV). The percentage of the urban population allocated to these two concentration classes is calculated by dividing the population represented by the stations assigned to each individual concentration class by the sum of the population assigned to each station.* Ozone (O3): For each selected station fulfilling the valid data criteria, the 93.2 percentile (P93.2) of the daily maximum 8-hourly mean concentration series is calculated. P93.2 represents, in a complete series of 365 elements, the 26th highest value. When P93.2 is less than or equal to 120 µg/m3, it indicates that the long term objective was not exceeded on more than 25 days. Depending on the value of P93.2, each station (and its allocated population) is then classified uniquely in one of the two concentration classes (P93.2 >120 µg/m3, i.e., exceedance of the long term objective on more than 25 days, and P93.2 ≤120 µg/m3, i.e., exceedance of the long term objective on fewer than or equal to 25 days). The percentage of the urban population allocated to these two concentration classes is calculated by dividing the population represented by the stations assigned to each individual concentration class by the sum of the population assigned to each station.* Nitrogen dioxide (NO2): The annual mean concentration is calculated for each of the selected stations that fulfills the valid data criteria. Depending on the annual mean concentration, each station (and its allocated population) is then classified uniquely in one of the two concentration classes (less than or equal to the limit value (40 µg/m3), or greater than the limit value). The percentage of the urban population allocated to these two concentration classes is calculated by dividing the population represented by the stations assigned to each concentration class by the sum of the population assigned to each station.* Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP): The annual mean concentration is calculated for each of the selected stations fulfilling the valid data criteria. Depending on the mean concentration, each station (and its allocated population) is then classified uniquely in one of the two concentration classes (less than or equal to the target value (1.0 ng/m3), or greater than the target value). The percentage of the urban population allocated to these two concentration classes is calculated by dividing the population represented by the stations assigned to each concentration class by the sum of the population assigned to each station.Level of expertise required* HighLinks and references* Exceedance of air quality standards in urban areas EEA (2019). https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/exceedance-of-air quality-limit-3/assessment-5 Permalink: https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/13c96efc7a1f44ee9337b2e2cdf0 77a9* EC, 2006 - Development of a methodology to assess the population exposed to high levels of noise and air pollution close to major transport infrastructure, prepared by Entec UK Limited (Appendix D).* ETC/ACC, 2009 - Indicators on urban air quality. A review of current methodologies. ETC/ACC Technical paper 2009/8 (http://acm.eionet.europa.eu/reports/ETCACC_TP_2009_8_UrbanAQindicat ors)* EU, 2004 - Directive 2004/107/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 relating to arsenic, cadmium, mercury, nickel and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in ambient air. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32004L0107* Eurostat, 2014c - Urban Audit. (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/geodata/reference data/administrative-units-statistical-units/urban audit).https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and maps/indicators/exceedance-of-air-quality-limit-3/assessment-5* https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/exceedance-of-air quality-limit-3/assessment-
2.3.11 Sustainable transportSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to: E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityData source and input type Connection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionRequired DataPercentage of each mode of transportation (i.e. private, public, bicycles, pedestrians, availability of car-sharing solutions, availability of bicycles and eScooter renting services )Rush hour periods / traffic density periods for key roads in and out of cityExpected OutputsPercentage of each mode of transportation (i.e. private, public, bicycles, pedestrians, availability of car-sharing solutions, availability of bicycles and eScooter renting services)Rush hour periods / traffic density periods for key roads in and out of cityCalculation methods Level of expertise required Links and references 
2.3.12 Protection of water resource and environmentSocial challenge/ impact linked to: Environmental Level of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionTotal runoff volume: The total net rainfall which is not absorbed by the ground surface and thus which is excess runoff.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighborhood Project AreaStreetData source and input typeLand use maps National or local weather stationsConnection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionRequired DataVolume of rainfall(mm)Runoff coefficient valueExpected OutputsmmTotal volume of rainfall which is not absorbed by the ground. Calculation methodsRunoff volume = volume of rainfall X runoff coefficientRunoff coefficient value this is the average percentage of rainwater that runs off that type of surfacevalues for different surfaces are as follows:roof or impervious paving (such as an asphalt street) - 0.8-0.95Sonoran Desert uplands (healthy indigenous landscape): range 0.20–0.70, average 0.30–0.50Bare earth: range 0.20–0.75, average 0.35–0.55Grass/lawn: range 0.05–0.35, average 0.10–0.25For gravel use the coefficient of the ground below the gravelLevel of expertise requiredBasicLinks and referencesFront matter 10-29-09.qxd:Layout 1 (netdna-ssl.com)
2.3.13 Indoor air quality Social challenge/ impact linked to: EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionDegree to which buildings are designed to be environmentally friendly with respect to energy efficiency, water consumption, waste production, indoor environmental quality, and implementation of NBS (unitless value).Environmental design is a broad concept concerning the structural, design and systemic features of buildings defining their impact on their environment. It is related to the concept of green buildings, which refers to environmentally sustainable design, construction, operation, maintenance and end of life of buildings.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkProject areaData source and input typeOutdoor air quality surrounding the buildingBuilding location Connection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionRequired DataBuilding location Estimated outdoor air quality surrounding the target buildings (O3, CO and PM2.5)The methods to monitor air quality surrounding a certain building block smaller than neighbourhood level needs to be consideredFrom 2015, examples of wireless sensor networks that have permitted the quantification of pollutants at the sub-neighbourhood scale (Moltchanov et al., 2015).Expected OutputsEstimated indoor air quality Calculation methodsEstimation of indoor air quality by using outdoor air quality: using the existing research on the correlation between themOr place the sensor to measure Indoor air qualityLevel of expertise requiredDepending on the methodsLinks and referencesDoan, D. T., Ghaffarianhoseini, A., Naismith, N., Zhang, T., Ghaffarianhoseini, A., & Tookey, J. (2017). A critical comparison of green building rating systems. Building and Environment, 123, 243–260.Sharifi, A., & Murayama, A. (2013). A critical review of seven selected neighborhood sustainability assessment tools. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 38, 73–87.Sharifi, A., & Murayama, A. (2014). Neighborhood sustainability assessment in action: Cross-evaluation of three assessment systems and their cases from the US, the UK, and Japan. Building and Environment, 72, 243–258
2.3.14 Avoided GHG emissions through traffic interventionSocial challenge/ impact linked to: EnvironmentalCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionScale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityData source and input typeConnection with SDGsGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 13: Climate actionRequired Datathe data resolution is city:Km per person transport in area by car Km per person transport in area by public transport,Km per person transport in area by walking / cyclingVehicle emission inventory (total emission loads within a certain space and timeemission factors describing emission characteristics of individual vehicles (Zhang et al., 2018)Vehicle activity containing traffic volume, speed, fleet composition. Obtained by a field traffic survey. Emissions inventory, to help model carbon and air quality to a high spatiotemporal resolution.Expected OutputsCalculation methodsLevel of expertise requiredLinks and references
Data Cluster 3.2. Economic Dynamic Indicators1.2.1 Initial costs of NBS implementationSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionIndicators of Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Intervention subcriterion will assess the financial feasibility of the project scenario.Project's initial costs are those occurring during the design and construction phases.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input typethe technical stakeholders can contribute to the provision of data needed for the estimation model implementation. Connection with SDGs Goal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired DataParametric costs; At the beginning of the project.Expected Outputsestimated initial cost (€)Calculation methodsDifferent methods can be used to assess initial cost and the choice among them depends on the detail of the available data and of the evaluation itself. These methods can be classified in three different approaches:1) Top-down synthetic approach: when few and generic information is available, the estimation can be carried out by analogy with existing projects or by experts opinions;2) Bottom-up analytical approach: when more and detailed information is available, the estimation can be carried out using the work (cost) breakdown structure;3) Parametric approach: the estimation is carried out by analogy with existing projects but high quality data are needed.Level of expertise requiredHighGiven the high degree of expertise needed to calculate this indicator,Links and referencesCerezo-Narváez, A.; Pastor-Fernández, A.; Otero-Mateo, M.; Ballesteros-Pérez, P. Integration of Cost and Work Breakdown Structures in the Management of Construction Projects. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 1386.
3.2.2 Payback period for NBSSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionIndicators of Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Intervention subcriterion will assess the financial feasibility of the project scenario.The length of time required for the expected intervention to recover the cost of an investment. The payback period of a given investment or project is an important determinant of whether to undertake the position or project, as longer payback periods are typically not desirable for investment positions.Connected to other economic indicators such as initial cost and maintenance costs.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input type Connection with SDGs Goal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired DataInitial costs and cash flows for the proposed project.technical stakeholder can contribute to the provision of data needed for the estimation of the cash flows.Expected OutputsPBP = Initial Investment / Net Cash Flow per PeriodCalculation methodsThe formula to calculate the payback period (PBP) of an investment depends on whether the periodic cash inflows from the project are even or uneven. If the cash inflows are even (such as for investments in annuities), the formula to calculate payback period is:PBP = Initial Investment / Net Cash Flow per PeriodWhen cash inflows are uneven, we need to calculate the cumulative net cash flow for each period and then use the following formula:PBP = A + (B / C)where:A is the last period number with a negative cumulative cash flow;B is the absolute value (i.e., value without negative sign) of cumulative net cash flow at the end of the period A;C is the total cash inflow during the period following period ACumulative net cash flow is the sum of inflows to date, minus the initial outflow.yearly measurement Level of expertise requiredMediumLinks and referencesWilliams, J.R., et al. (2012), Financial and Managerial Accounting, McGraw-Hill.
Data cluster 3.3. Economic multi-stage co-monitoring indicators3.3.1 Avoided costs due to NBS implementationSocial challenge/ impact linked to: EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionIndicators of Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Intervention subcriterion will assess the financial feasibility of the project scenario.Avoided costs are essentially the costs of the damages, which a catastrophic event could provoke without the expected intervention.+ It is a frequently used benefit estimation technique, both because it is a common-sense approach and because the information needed to assess avoided costs is often readilyachievable. - It could be very time consuming since many different models should be implemented to assess the expected damages.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input typetechnical stakeholder can contribute to the provision of data needed for the estimation of the expected damages.Connection with SDGs Goal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired DataDifferent type of data (spatial data, models, parametric costs, etc.), depending on the hazardous phenomenon taken into account.Expected Outputs€Calculation methodsThe avoided costs method estimates the cost that the community would incur in the absence of project scenario implementation. Given that NBS could prevent multiple risks, the avoided costs is equal to the sum of costs associated with responding to each risk faced by NBS. Thus, for each hazardous phenomenon regarding the study area, it is essential to assess the expected damages and the cost of actions taken in response to the phenomenon after it occurs.Level of expertise requiredHighLinks and referencesU.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1993), A Guide for Costeffectiveness and Cost-benefit Analysis of State and Local Ground Water Protection Programs.
3.3.2 Maintenance costs of NBSSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicLevel of importance 1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionIndicators of Cost-Benefit Analysis of an NBS Intervention enable assessment of the financial feasibility of a given project scenario. The maintenance costs indicator sums the total costs of sustaining the NBS implemented.Maintenance expenses are the costs incurred to keep an item in good condition or in good working order. This total maintenance cost must include total annual labour costs, land leasing costs, machinery, energy costs, licensing, etc.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input typethe financial officer of the administrating entity should be able to respond.Connection with SDGs Goal 8: Decent work and economic growthGoal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired DataCost estimates or actual cost reporting from entitles administering the NBS and sub-contractors.Expected OutputsCost estimates or actual cost reporting from entitles administering the NBS and sub-contractors.Calculation methodsData can be collected via an economic and labour questionnaire to be distributed to the entities in charge of long-term maintenance of the planned or implemented NBS. Estimation from project financial assessment.At least once after implementation. Potential to estimate maintenance costs during planning stage.Level of expertise requiredHighLinks and references 
3.3.3 Valuation of NBSSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionGI-Val is Mersey Forest's green infrastructure valuation toolkit. The current prototype is free and open-source and can be downloaded under a Creative Commons License from: https://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityData source and input typeGeneral information about baseline conditions and NBs interventions for the area under examinationConnection with SDGs Goal 3: Good health and well-beingGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesRequired DataDeveloping the toolkit’s next iteration will require wide and sustained collaboration. To facilitate this process, interested parties are invited to pass the toolkit to others who might be able to incorporate it into their work and to provide feedback on their experience in using the toolkit, good and bad! Sources of improved evidence Suggestions for improving the tools Ideas for new tools The consortium that led the development of this toolkit has handed over the responsibilities for co-ordinating future work to the Green Infrastructure Value Network (GIVaN). Further information on the network can be found at: www.bit.ly/givaluationtoolkitExpected Outputs Calculation methodsThe toolkit provides a set of calculator tools, to help assess an existing green asset or proposed green investment. They are organised under eleven key benefits of green infrastructure:The toolkit looks at how the range of green infrastructure benefits derived from an asset or investment can be shown:in monetary terms – applying economic valuation techniques where possiblequantitatively – for example with reference to jobs, hectares of land, visitorsqualitatively – referencing case studies or important research where there appears to be a link between green infrastructure and economic, social or environmental benefit but where the scientific basis for quantification and/or monetisation is not yet sufficiently robust.The toolkit uses standard valuation techniques to assess the potential benefits provided by green infrastructure within a defined project area. These benefits are assessed in terms of the functions that the green infrastructure may perform, support or encourage, depending upon the type of project.Once data are entered into the toolkit, financial values are generated for many NBS benefits. The toolkit identifies the marginal benefit and the additional value of the green infrastructure/NBS. Coded algorithms ensure that there is no 'double counting' of component values.Level of expertise requiredTechnical / ExpertLinks and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D5.3: City Diagnosis and Monitoring Procedures https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d5-3-city-diagnosis-and-monitoring-procedures.kl http://www.merseyforest.org.uk/services/gi-val/Nowak, McPherson and Rowntree, Chicago’s urban forest ecosystem: results of the Chicago urban forest climate project, USDA,1994Air Pollution in the UK 2015. https://ukair. defra.gov.uk/library/annualreport/indexBottalico, F., Chirici, G., Giannetti, F., De Marco, A., Nocentini, S., Paoletti, E., Salbitano, F., Sanesi, G., Serenelli, C., Travaglini, D., 2016. Air pollution removal by green infrastructures and urban forests in the city of Florence. Agric. Agric. Sci. Procedia 8, 243–251. doi:10.1016/j.aaspro.2016.02.099.SDG indicator 3.9.1 https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/files/Metadata-03-09-01.pdfSDG indicator 11.6.2.https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/files/Metadata-11-06-02.pdf
3.3.4 HPI - House Pricing IndexTopicUrban challengesSub-challengesEconomy7 - Green Economy7.2 - Direct Economic Value of NBSDescriptionThe indicator measures the price of residential building’s value in an area or group of areas. In this case, the value of housing act as a component of wealth in an area.Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkNationalCityNeighborhood StreetHouseholdData source [ link to data framework]Information from the real estate market in the area of interest. This should include the characteristics of the houses.Data in the following housing characteristics for a statistically relevant number of observations inside the area of interest:The area of the structure of the houseThe area of the land that the structure sits onThe locationThe age of the structureThe type of structure (apartment, detached dwelling, etc.)The materials used in the constructionThe number of bedrooms, bathrooms, garage, and other facilitiesUrban green areas characteristics: distance to houses, size, spatial configuration, species compositionNeedsNo specific tool is required, but statistical treatment of the information is necessary. Therefore, software such as excel or specific statistical software (R, SPSS, Past) will be required.Expected OutputsUnits: Euros/m2Annual measurementsQuantitativeCalculation methodsExtracted from Eurostat (2013) a calculation methods is proposed: hedonic regression method (time dummy variable method).Definition of hedonic modelling (EUROSTAT, 2013, p.26). “Hedonic modelling assumes that information on the characteristics of the properties sold is known, the samples can be stratified and, if a sufficient number of observations is available, separate indices can be estimated for the strata. In other words, hedonic regression methods can provide a set of constant quality price indices for various types of property”Calculation (EUROSTAT, 2013, p.50). In order to be able to estimate the marginal contributions of the characteristics using standard regression techniques, equation (5.1) has to be specified as a parametric model. The two best-known hedonic specifications are the fully linear model.In practice, many explanatory variables will be categorical rather than continuous and represented by a set of dummy variables which take the value of 1 if a property belongs to the category in question and the value of 0 otherwise.Specificities of the Time Dummy Variable method to better account for changes on the quantities of the characteristics and their affection on the house price change can be found from page 51 of EUROSTAT (2013).Also a case study showing how to perform the calculation is found in page 57 of the same report (with information of the case study on page 42).Links and referencesEUROSTAT. 2013. Handbook on residential property indices. EUROSTAT, Belgium.EUROSTAT. 2017. Housing Price Statistics. [Link]: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/housing-price-statistics [Last Access]: 01/10/2017Cho, S.H., Poudyal, N.C. and Roberts, R.K. 2008. Spatial analysis of the amenity value of green open space. Ecological Economics, 66(2), pp.403-416.Luttik, J., 2000. The value of trees, water and open space as reflected by house prices in the Netherlands. Landscape and urban planning, 48(3), pp.161-167.Saphores, J.D. and Li, W. 2012. Estimating the value of urban green areas: A hedonic pricing analysis of the single family housing market in Los Angeles, CA. Landscape and Urban Planning, 104(3), pp.373-38 
3.3.5 Health cost as a consequence of air pollutionSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionHealth-related social costs of air pollution are monetized to give them tangible, comparable cost values. This allows the Willingness to Pay to be determined. This includes social costs incorporating health care expenditure and indirect health impacts including reduced life expectancy and diseases related to air pollution. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityData source and input typeSecondary public statisticsConnection with SDGs Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesRequired DataPopulation total Total concentration of different air pollution particlesExpected OutputsUsing existing studies of standardised cost estimates and combining them with local air pollution dataCalculation methodsAccording to the method used by de Bruyn and de Vries, there are three steps involved in calculating the social costs of air pollution. These are outlined in more detail at *final-health-costs-of-air-pollution-in-european-cities-and-the-linkage-with-transport.pdf (epha.org). Firstly, air pollutant concentrations are determined, and secondly unit specific damage costs are calculated for mortality and morbidity. Finally, total damage costs are calculated by multiplying pollution concentration with the unity damage costs and the total population affected. Level of expertise requiredHighLinks and referenceshttps://epha.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/final-health-costs-of-air-pollution-in-european-cities-and-the-linkage-with-transport.pdfhttps://cedelft.eu/publications/environmental-prices-handbook-eu28-version/https://cedelft.eu/publications/further-explanation-of-methods-used-for-monetizing-impacts-from-air-pollution/3.3.6 Number of new businesses created and gross value added to local economyProject Name: URBAN GreenUPPillar of Sustainable DevelopmentSocietal challengePeople6 - Place RegenerationDescriptionThe impact assessment of the implementation of NBS in terms of new business creation and improvement on business rates.This KPI, related to economic aspects measurements, evaluates how NBS interventions can increase the attraction of businesses, or how to increase the value of the existing ones. This value, evaluated through the measurements of number of new business created and the percentage of the gross value added, will reflect the economic opportunities and potential of NBS solutions. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighbourhoodData source [ link to data framework]Manual input by municipality and city technical partnersCity recordsData needsCity official data, city platforms, questionnaires, small/medium enterprise account (Related to de NBS investment zone)(nº business) (€/m2)(nº business or nº users) (kg/year) (€/year)Expected OutputsNumber of business created= n * Z [(nº business) (€/m2)]Gross value added: total contribution of NBS in % of the total GVA to the region/area economy in Euro/ by year.Calculation methodsNumber of business created (direct value buss related NBS by zone)Direct value on business created by zone NBS affected, before and after implementation, during the established period.Number of business created= n * Z [(nº business) (€/m2)]Where n is referring to the number of business and Z to its increased value (NBS related by zone), during the established period of implementation (directly related to the each particular NBS)Gross value added (GVA)Defined as the difference between the value of goods and services produced and the cost of raw materials and other non-labour inputs, which are used up in production. The research should conclude what is the total contribution of NBS in % of the total GVA to the region/area economy in Euro/ by year.Links and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D2.4 - Monitoring program to Valladolid. https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d2-4--- monitoring-program-to-valladolid.klForestry Commission, Scotland, The economic an d social contribution of forestry for people in Scotland, David Edwards, Jake Morris, Liz O´Brien, Vadims Sarajevs and Gregory Valatin, September 2008Guidance Document on Monitoring and Evaluation – ERDF and Cohesion Fund, Concepts and Recommendations, Programming Period 2014-2020, European Commission, April 2013. Annex13.3.7 Number of new jobs createdSocial challenge/ impact linked to: EconomicLevel of importance 1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionGreen jobs should contribute to environmental benefits. They should be striving for minimisation of resources, createdecent employment opportunities and build low-carbon sustainable societies. The International Labour Organization(ILO) has a methodology to estimate green jobs. According to ILO's various country-wide studies, primary green activities (i.e., organic agriculture, sustainable forestry), secondary activities (i.e., renewable energy, clean industry, sustainable construction) and tertiary activities (i.e., recycling, sustainable tourism, and sustainable transport)are defined as green jobs.This KPI, related to economic aspects measurements, evaluates how NBS interventions can increase the attraction of businesses, or how to increase the value of the existing ones. This value, evaluated through the measurements of the number of jobs created will reflect the economic opportunities and potential of NBS solutions.Scale as linked to D2.2 framework CityNeighborhood Data source and input typeManual input by municipality and city technical partnersCity recordsCity official data, city platforms, questionnaires, small-medium enterprise accounts… (Related to de NBSinvestment zoneConnection with SDGsGoal 1: No povertyGoal 8: Decent work and economic growthGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired DataDirect value on employment by zone, before and after implementation, during the established period.Expected Outputs(Nº jobs) (€/m2)(Nº jobs or nº users) (€/year)Calculation methodsEssentially a 'before-after' indicator which captures the part of the employment increase that is a direct consequence of NBS implementation (workers employed to implement the NBS project should not be directly counted). The positions need to be filled (vacant posts are not counted)and increase the total number of jobs in the enterprise. If total employment in the enterprise does not increase, the value is zero – it is regarded as realignment, not increase. Safeguarded, etc., jobs are not included.Gross: Not counting the origin of the jobholder as long as it directly contributes to the increase of total jobs in the organisation. The indicator should be used if the employment increase can plausibly be attributed to the support.Full-time equivalent: Jobs can be full time, part-time or seasonal. Seasonal and part-time jobs are to be converted to FTE using ILO/statistical/other standards. Durability: Jobs are expected to be permanent, i.e., last for a reasonably long period depending on industrial-technological characteristics; seasonal jobs should be recurring. Figures of enterprises that went bankrupt are registered as a zero employment increase.Timing: Data is collected before the project starts and after it finishes; the NBS holders are free to specify the exact timing (depending on the NBS time needed to get the profit). Using average employment, based on 6 months or a year, is preferred to employment figures on certain dates.Number of jobs created (Direct employment)Direct value on employment by zone, before and after implementation, during the established period.Number of jobs created= n * Z [(nº jobs) (€/m2)]Where n is referred to the direct full-time employment in during the time defined (directly related to the each particular NBS); Z- affected zone/area in reference to the NBS (should depend on NBS the definition of the area)Level of expertise requiredTechnical / BasicLinks and referencesURBAN GreenUP Deliverable D2.4 - Monitoring program toValladolid.https://www.urbangreenup.eu/insights/deliverables/d2-4---monitoring-program-to-valladolid.klExpert Working Group report, 2017"The Model of the Environmental Sustainability Matrix" (“El Modelode la matriz de Sostenibilidad Ambiental”); La ordenación Urbana y el Desarrollo Sostenible, Angel Ibañez Ceba, FermínCerezo Rubio, August 2009The five principles of the urbanization theory of Cerdá, Engineering and Territory Magazine, Spanish edition, 2009Expert evaluation network delivering policy analysis on the performance of Cohesion policy 2007-2013, 2013, “Job creation as an indicator of outcomes in ERDF programmes”, Synthesis report, August 2013, A report to the EuropeanCommission Directorate-General for Regional and urban policyForestry Commission, Scotland, The economic and social contribution of forestry for people in Scotland, David Edwards, Jake Morris, Liz O´Brien, Vadims Sarajevs and Gregory Valatin, September 2008Guidance Document on Monitoring and Evaluation – ERDF and Cohesion Fund, Concepts and Recommendations, Programming Period 2014-2020, European Commission, April 2013. Annex1
3.3.8 Proportion of businesses measuring and mitigating CO2 emissionsNew indicator for DivAirCitySocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescriptionCompanies with good intentions to cut their emissions must start by measuring their current CO2 emissions in order to act as a baseline for setting reduction targets. Despite this, a survey by BCG found that respondents estimated a 30-40% average error rate in their emissions measurements (BCG, 2021). Two types of emissions must be measured, internal and external. internal emissions - those produced by a company's direct activities e.g. from their vehicles or energy which thye purchase. External emissions - upstream activities such as purchased goods, and downstream activities e.g. product transportation and end-of-life treatment. Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkCityNeighborhoodData source and input typeSurvey among business owners and industryConnection with SDGsGoal 7: Affordable and clean energyGoal 13: Climate actionRequired DataSurvey responses from business owners and industriesExpected OutputsNumber of businesses who measure CO2 emissions and their Calculation methodsQuestion: Do you measure your greenhouse gas emissions?Within this measurement do you include internal emissions (those which are produced by your immediate activities, for example from company vehicles and energy used in your stores and supply chain)?Within this measurement do you include external emissions (those which are incurred along your value chain, for example during end-of-life produce treatment, or the transportation of goods)?Level of expertise requiredMediumLinks and referencesMeasuring Emissions Accurately | BCGHow to calculate your carbon footprint as a small business | FSB, The Federation of Small BusinessesUK - SME Climate hub (businessclimatehub.org)
3.3.9 Public spending on bioeconomySocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance2 - Medium Importance / good to haveDescriptionThe term bioeconomy has many different definitions, but for the purpose of DivAirCity it refers to the share of the economy based on products, services, and processes derived from biological resources (Gallo, 2021). Measuring the financial input to this sector remains a challenge however, as it cuts across traditional sectors and also contains intangible assets.The broad process to calculate the value of the total bioeconomy can be summarised as the sum of the private values and added firms in the sector (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, 2020). There is no one-size-fits-all approach to measuring bioeconomy and often the best approach is a combination of methods (Wesseler & von Braun, 2017).Scale as linked to D2.2 frameworkDelete as appropriate:NationalCityNeighborhood Project AreaData source and input type Connection with SDGsGoal 3: Good health and well-beingGoal 4: Quality educationGoal 8: Decent work and economic growthGoal 9: Industry, innovation and infrastructureGoal 10: Reduced inequalitiesGoal 11: Sustainable cities and communitiesGoal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired Dataprimary economic segments of interestproduction data from thee segments estimations of each bioeconomic activityExpected Outputs Calculation methodsAccording to National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2020:1. Set boundaries for the definition of the bioeconomy to identify primary seg ments of interest (see Chapter 2).In this example the segments included: crop products, biofuels (ethanol), biopharmaceuticals, biologics (enzymes), other pharmaceuticals, other enzumes, other biobased chemicals, biobased plastic products, data services + software purchases. 2. Identify subsets of the primary segments to be included, encompassing rel evant bioeconomy-specific equipment investments (e.g., sequencing ma chines) and services (e.g., biotechnology patent and legal services) and in tangible assets produced and/or curated for use by the sector (e.g., genomic databases).3. Identify the relevant production data that map to the delineated bioeconomy segments. Table 3-2 provides a mapping based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes currently used by the U.S. Census Bureau to collect detailed data on the value of production.Certain bioeconomy activities are inherently narrower than existing NAICS codes, and measuring those activities requires developing estimates based on auxiliary sources (or new NAICS codes), or building new aggregates from establishment-level survey or admin istrative microdata.For each biobased production activity, determine the portion that is currently versus potentially (under existing technology) biobased (e.g., determine what percentage of plastics are made through a biobased process).Obtain estimates for value added for each relevant bioeconomy activity based on the same methods and data used in national accounts (“GDP by industry”).Determine appropriate interindustry linkages and sources of supply (i.e., domestic versus foreign) and estimate relevant input-output “multipliers” based on these linkages.4. The sum of value added estimates is the direct impact of bioeconomy produc tion on the U.S. economy; the additional value added implied by input-output multipliers estimates the total contribution of the bioeconomy to the U.S. economyLevel of expertise required Links and referencesGallo, M.E. 2021. The Bioeconomy: A primer. Congressional Research Service. R46881 (congress.gov)Wesseler, J. and von Braun, J., 2017. Measuring the bioeconomy: Economics and policies. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 9, pp.275-298.National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2020. Safeguarding the Bioeconomy. Chapter 3: Frameworks for measuring the value of the U.S. bioeconomy. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25525.
3.3.10 Energy consumption and cost of operation of blockchainSocial challenge/ impact linked to:EconomicCo-creation phase linked to:E) Co-monitoringLevel of importance1 - High Importance / must haveDescription Scale as linked to D2.2 framework Project AreaData source and input type data collected manually by the project personnelConnection with SDGs Goal 9: Industry, innovation and infrastructureGoal 12: Responsible consumption and productionRequired Datatotal energy consumption of the operation of DivAirCity blockchain (WP5)total value of NBS (3.3.3)energy consumption of other blockchains total cost calculated by the energy consumption of DivAirCity blockchain Expected OutputsTotal cost of operation of DivAirCity Smart Cities Climate Contracts against the benefitTotal energy consumption of DivAirCity Smart Cities Climate Contracts against the energy saving through the projectEnergy consumption of DivAirCity Smart Cities Climate Contracts against the average energy consumption of blockchainCalculation methods Level of expertise requiredHigh (WP5 involvement is necessary) Links and references D2.2: Digital Innovation and D&I Data Management Framework  		Page 3 of 3